bangalore taluq.  1  date 1628 δ.ό.   telugu — be it well.  on the date specified , when the rajadhiraja raja-parameavara vira- pratapa vira-rama-deva-maharaya, seated on the jewel throne, was ruling the empire of the world :—when, of the asannava-kula, the yalahanka-nad prabhu kempanachaya-gauni's grandson, kempe-gauni's son, immadi-kempt-gaunayya was iuiing a peaceful kingdom in righteousness ;—-all the people of bengalur pete entered into the folio win g agreement ;—  be it well. obtainers of all favours from their own mahankalika, worshippers of the lotus feet of  the gods  ganesvara gauriavara and vira-narayana, chief men in ayyavaje, all the salumula of both nana denis of this country and other countries, and all the salumula of both  sects of  the nana denis of pekkonda penugonda bengaluru gujuru chikkanayinipalle ... ballapuram katiparti ava.. chandragiri kolala kottakota kaveripatna rayakota narasipuram beluru hebburu naga- mangalam ikkeri bastipalli and other places,—for the offerings, festivals and other ceremonies of the god ranganatha of mutyalapete in bengaluru,—made application to kempe-gauni, and granted certain dues  specified   usual imprecatory verses. signatures. 
 2  date 1633 a.d.   telugu —.. ·· in order that dharma might be to the yalahanka-nad prabhu, immadi-kempaya- gauni, and his eons and grandsons in succession, as long as sun and moon endure,—gujjari visva- natha had the dharmaeala matlia built  in tha year specified . 
 3  date 1855 a.d.  be it we'll.  on the date specified , the disciple of siddhagiri-gosavi of somavftra-pete in the punaha-shaharu-kaeabe  poona city , vijayagiri-gosavi's disciple, bhagavantagiri-gosavi,—the hliata many field  specified , with house, threshing-floor, and manure pit, belonging to dharma- dikshita, to the east of the tavarekere village in the begun taluk attached to bengaluru, which i have bought from dharma-dikshita's grandson sham-bhata for company rupees 400,—i have grant- ed, for the love of the god, for the offerings, illuminations, priest and servants of the god manchi- someavara in the aralepete of bengaluru. imprecations,  whoso maintains this with good will, his feet be on my head.  bangalore taluq 
 4  date 1830 a.d.   telugu —obeisance to vishnu,1 his lofty head kissed by the charaara-like crescent moon, the foundation, pillar for the city of the three worlds. may the tush of the eoar, the sportive form of hair  vishnu , protect us, supported on which the earth shone, with the snowy mountain as a canopy.  be it weli.  on the date specified , when the raiadhiraja raja-martanda, raja-tejo-nidhi, raja. kanthirava, praudha-pratapa, krishua-raja-sarvvabhauma, was ruling the empire of the world, seated on the jewel throne in the midst of the two kaveris :—  for the offerings, illuminations and festivals of our family god venkatesvara sugriva,—we, all those of the 39 gotras of vira-kehatriyas of the melu-s'arkaru-vamsa in this place and in other places, have, of our own will, caused to be written and given a dana s'asana as follows ;—those in bengaluru, agree to give for each family per annum 1 ruka, at goknlashtami \, at navaratri i, and for each marriage 3 : those in other places, agree to give 1 ruza per family per annum, and for each marriage  . to be continued as long as sun, moon, mountains, earth, sky and the seven oceans endure,—by us, our sons and posterity. imprecations. signatures. 
 5  date 1858 a.d.   ttlugu --date. the tomb of manapati venkataramanappa-nayini of kalyanadurga in the rayadurga-samsthana, who attained to the feet of virupa ou the date  specified . 
 6  date 1253 a.d.  {nagart characters . on the seal are a tiger in relief, and the salaka or rod, with sun and moon above  may he protect us, the original boar, on whose tush the shadow of the mountain-like earth made her appear as if for joy she had grown double. display, a tongue, thy courage,— i beseech thee with folded hands,—in publishing the praises of the kings of the lunar race ; albeit the utter- once of the victorious deeds of kings is so pleasing to thee, why should i implore thee ?  from the lake the navel of the divine creator of all, the protector of the three worlds,—which contains all the world,—vishnu, sprang a lotus ; at which s'ri, who was born from the lotus as her home, rejoiced that she would now ever without separation enjoy union with her beloved. from that lotus was born the divine vidhi  brahma , an ocean for the play of the waves the sayings of the sruti  or vedas , a householder whose household duties were performed by the ever graceful bharati, creator of the world with its revealed and hidden things, its past present and future, its half-formed and not-yet-formed life. from his mind was born the sage  hamsa  atri, of pleasing character, dwelling in appointed forests, ever pure of mind. from his eye issued a stream of mercy like the river of heaven, as if the foam of which was born, giving joy to all piople, the solid chandra  the moon , the drops of shining nectar shed by whom heal the wounds that women receive from the nails of their lovers when embracing them. from him as the beginning sprar.g a supreme race of kings, the fire of whose valour withered up the bloom of the fame of their enemies. in it were born lady and many kings named in the puranas, who by their valour subdued the world, able in giving bangalore taluq  joy to kings dependent on them, devoted to learning, maintaining their thrones by the continual performance of sacrifices and festivals.  among many such kings who thus in turn bore the burden of kingdom, was the mighty king named sala. once on a time, that king going into the woo j s near to s'asapura in order to worship his family goddess named vasanti, saw there a holy mundi and sat down by him for a moment in peace- while unarmed, intent on worship of the goddess and reverence of the muni, the noise of wild beasts suddenly arose in the forest. after them a tiger appeared from somewhere, his claws such as to split through mountains, with an immense tongue issuing from the cave of his wide-open mouth, sparks flying from his eyes which looked up, while his tail was raised on high, and his roar filled all the points of the compass. in the language of his own country that mundi exclaiming hoy sala  strike, sala ! , he at once slew it with the s'alaka  or rod  which he gave him. whence all the kings of that line were called hoysajas, while the tiger, going to svarga, as if from desire to con- stantly witness their fighting, became fixed on their flag, by the wind from the feathers of the arrows discharged by whom their enemies were shaken. then wasrborn the king vinayaditya, the bright- ness of whose fame illuminated even the abodes formed of creepers within the caves of mount meru, delighting in the game of putting down the pride of hostile kings, able in inventing many new modes of works of piety. from him was the king ereyanga, who placed his feet in order like a crown on the heads of kings, who by the smoke of the burning cities in which his trained horses had trampled to death all his enemies brought tears into the eyes of the groups of gods who had assembled for sport. vishnu was his son, whose footstool was tinted from the radiance of the jewels in the crowns of prostrate kings. the black smoke of the sacrifices offered in the villages given away by whom heightened the whiteness of his fame. the clouds of dust, raised by his prancing horsemen rose like smoke and blinded the eyes of the goddesses in the sky ; but afterwards the waving of the flags on the temples he had erected blew it away.  his son was the king narasimha, who, overcoming the valour of hostile kings, consigned them to abodes in the caves of the mountains. in enjoying the sport of setting up pillars of victory relating to his numerous conquests his arm was like a pleasure-loving serpent.  his son, whose feet were served by the wives of hostile kings, was the king bamaja, who deprived all his enemies of their wealth. for the pleasure of serving him and dwelling in his city, many hostile kings collected together the funds they had reserved for time of calamity. the wind from the breath of the nostrils of his prancing horses caused the enemies to shake ; while in the fire of his anger the line s of his enemies cities were burnt down. the flashing of the sword in his arm brought death into the faces of his enemies, and on his merely lifting his bow the hostile kings fell down in obeisance before him. his queen was the beautiful padmala, the hands of all kings folded to her in homage. his lame in whiteness was sister to fresh jtismin, sandal, nectar, kailasa, the moon, moonlight, the swan, a pearl, or the ganges.  to those two was born the son narasimha, with the signs of pleasure to all the world, like the moon on the shore of the milk ocean. and from them was born as lakshmi, praised by all people, trusted by all kings, the famous somala, adorned with the garland of good qualities. when the earth was supported in the arms of that king, s'esha went about his own business of twining round the top-knot of dhurjati  s'iva  ; and the eight mountains at the points of the compass, hearing the songs of his praise sung by the gandharvas, echoed back the songs. when, his mind immersed in the desire for war, this king narasimha came forth to battle, what kings could stand before him ? on an expedition of victory, the points of the rods which bore the banners that preceded him were as flames the sight of which was sufficient to plunge the wives of his enemies into widowhood. on his goingbangalore taluq  forth to war in the autumn, the vvive3 of the hostile king and their retinue were so filled with  ear that the tears streaming from their eyes produced the rains of that season. that the king of the serpents supporte;! on his soft head the heavy earth pressed down by the tramp of this king nara- simha's troops was no wonder, for the smoke of the burning cities of his enemies buoyed it up. vikramapala, pamsa, makara, and the fierce hoysaryama, became as animals which he offered up ία sacrifice, his enveloping arrows being the darbhe grass spread round it, the battle-field his sacri- facial hall, his anger the fig wood for kindling fire by rubbing, the hosts of his enemies the fuel, his glory the fire, his words of threatening the mantras, the result  or reward  of it the setting up of chola.  his son was the king soi-deva whose birth so far from being a festival of rejoicing to his ene- miss was an omen of death. at the birth of that lord all the evil doers were filled with sorrow, while the g  od were filled with joy and all the points of the compass exulted, all troubles were removed, arid sins were driven afar. mighty was soi-deva, whose feet were surrounded with the heads of prostrate kings. at his coronation-anointing the sounds of the trumpets went beyond the mountains at the points of the compass. brilliant is the river in flood of his fame, which laid the dust raised by his enemies, put out the flames of their glory, .... indra and upendra, purified the breasts of his enemies wives  by washing off all ornamental marks, on their becoming widows , dragged off the clusters of buds the crowns of hostile kings, and bore away the troubles of the world. the movements of bis horse and foot over the batttle-field raised a dust which obscured the sun, but the streams of blood flowing from his enemies was as oil feeding the fires which lighted it up. was it the wind caused by his waving banners when he went forth to war that raised the waves of the sea ? rather was it the plunging into the waters of the armies of his enemies smitten by the strokes of his sword,  in the pure ocean the bharadvaja-kula, born in the soma-vamsa  or lunar race , was the king chiddarasa, chief among the virtuous and among those who bear arms. his fame, white as jasmin, the moon, or ivory, was daily worn as an earring by the wives of the gods. his clever wife was the famous vudanachi, seeing whose wealth kubera fled with shame to the ends of the world. from her was born a daughter named somala, a collection of the essence of all gems, of slender waist, in beauty surpassing rati, her hand adorned with a lotus, like lakshmi in removing the troubles of the needy. to the king soma she became the crowned queen, and by her gifts put to shame the tree of plenty. with firm faith in the feet of chandravatamsa  s'iva , that wife named somala, along with the fame of king soma, ascended to heaven, and with it took up her long abode.*  he, adorned with all titles, of pure character, the king somesvaia, dwelling in the great capital named viuramapura, which he had created for his pleasure in the chola-mandala that he had conquered by the might of his own arm,  on the date specified , at the time of the eclipse of the sun, in consequence of a discourse on the many gifts proper to be made on that day,— for the final happi- ness of his crowned queen somala-devi,—giving to madanapalli along with mattikatta, situated in the kalukuni-nad-vishaya,—-the rent of which was 140 nishkas,—another name of somalapura, formed it into 70 shares, and made a grant of them to brahnnns of many gotras and to gods, with pouring of water.  the grant repeated in kannada, with numerous details of the rents payable. he thus gave to the brahmans 62 shares, 1 for the rig-veda khandika, 1 her the yajur-veda khandika, i for the sama-veda khandika, 1 for bhatta-vritti, 2 for the god he had set up in the town. 2 for the tank,— altogether 70 shares, the annual rent of which, payable to the palace, was ga 140.  from ulis it would appear that she now died. a bangalore taluq  5  for many yugas and kalpas, as long as the sun's chariot goes forth, as long as the sea rolls with waves, as long as rivers male and female flow, as long as the sun shines and the earth stands n'rm, as long as the sky with its constellations lasts, as long as set and mere continue,—so long may this gift of the king somesvara endure. other usual final verses.   signed -— sri-vira-somesvaraeya. 
 6  date 1297 α.ό.   tamil —i, koil-ip daliyar, the greatpasayitta of the s'andilja gotra, gave  on the date speci- fied  to the mahajanas of irumbiliur, alias vira-vallaja-chchatuivedi-mangalam, the villages of s'ayanallay and koppipalli, included in the district of tommalur in ilaippakka-nadu,  excluding the  lands formerly granted  as tiriividaiyattam, hatta-vritti, pallichchandam, madappuram.........  situated within the four boundaries of those villages............. usual final imprecatory sent-.  once . may there be prosperity. ramabhadra a?ain and again entreats all future kings that they should from time to time protect this bridge of virtue, which is common to all kings. 
 7  date 1791 a.d.   persian —as soon as the foundation of this palace was laid, its head was raised to heaven with joy. oh, what a lofty mansion, a home of happiness, its summit being above the skies. it is a house of glass in purity, all who see it are struck with wonder. in magnificence it rivals the sky, which hangs down its head with shame. the description alone of this palace, when heard by taridun,1 caused him to go to his long sleep. i sought by computation according to zar2 for the date, and an unseen angel said—"a house of happiness,'' 1196  1781 a.d. . when the painting of this new palace was finished, it cast the beauty of china into oblivion. i sought for this date from khizir3 the wise, who said—"doubtless it is envied by heaven," 1206 1791 a.d.  
 8  date 1440 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , in order that the rajadhiraja raja-paramesvara vira-deva- raya-maharaya might be seated on the  jewel  throne,—mallarasa, the adhikari of hejjunka in the sondeyakoppa-vente, sent by rayauna of pattana, gave to the god chokkanatha of dombalur a grant as follows whereas formerly whatever customs-officers came to sondeyakoppa-vente made a gift of their share of the hejjmhn levied from those who came to any of the villages within the four boundaries  of the land  belonging to the god chokkanatha of dombalur,—in order that the former custom may continue as long as sun and moon, and that all empire may he to our rayanna- odeyar,—we grant our respective shares as a gift to provide the offering at dawn of the god chokkanatha, to continue as long as sun and moon. imprecations.  a ... an ancient model king of persia, noted for iii justice and generosity.    system invented by tips sultan, calculating by ahtas instead of the ordinary abjad, the arab notation in common use among muhammadans. see mysore gazetteer, revised edition of 1397, vol. i, appendix, p. 812 .  a. prophet who was minister to a king of persia. he disoorered and drank of the fountain of life and became immortal. by some he is confounded with the prophet elias, and likewise with st. george of england, whom they call khizir elias.  bangalore taluq 
 9  date ? about 1270 a.d.   tatnil —»i, alagiyar, made......in the name of .. ... .. in the temple of s'okkapperuraal  these two door-posts are his charity. 
 10  date ? 1266 a.d.1   tamil — on the date specified , i, talaikkaffu iravi tripurantaka-settiyar of tombalur, alias teeimanikka-pattinam in ilaippakka-nadu of rajendra-s ota-vala-nadu—along with  my wife  parpati- eettichchiyar, granted, as tax-free temple property, for the god tripurantaka-pperumal, set up by myself,—so that he might be worshipped to save from re-birth nambi iravi-settiyar,  his wife  s'rideviyakka and their descendants, and for victory to the arm and sword of tribhuvanama'la vembi-deva and his descendants, —the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries in the village of jalappalli, the tank at vinuamangalam and certain other lands  specified  below the big tank of tombalur, and made them over, along with some other lands  specified , to the holder of the temple land, irama-piran allala-nambiyar, for conducting the worship. i also gave over, with pouring of water, the charge of this temple to talai s'ankarappachariyan tillainayagan's nephew manali tripurantaka-pperumal-achariyan, granted him the right of officiating at consecration, and gave him, for meeting the expenses of repairs to the temple, certain lands  specified  to descend to his sons and grandsons for as long as the moon and the sun exist. further, i granted certain lands  speci- fied in each case  to the hold  r of the temple land, kaduvanudaiyan s'uriyan s'ambandar, to the temple servants and to s'okka-pper may manikkam..............................................   those who violate this charity  shall incur the sin of having slaughtered tawny cows and brah- mans on the b inks  of the  ganges , and shall be born worms in crdure for as long as the rocks, the kaveri, the grass and t le earth endure, and the brahma-kalpa lasts.  i, allaja-nambiyar, made a gift of one-third of my land in tombalur to s'avari-pperumal-nam- biyar. 
 11  date 1290 a.d.   tamil —in the 6th year of the reign of poysaja vira-itamanada-devar—  on a petition being made by the inhabitants of ilaippakka-nadu, the officer s'ella-ppiljai, the temple-manager a ; u&igal narayana-tadar and some others  named , to the effect that the provision made for the expense  s of festivals of the god s'okkapperumaj of tombalur is inadequate, the king remitted  on the date specified  10 pon out of the amount that was being paid by  the village of  tombalur. usual final imprecatory sentence. 
 12  date ? about 1300 a.d.  tamil — this inscription a is mostly gone .  this is the rtaivri-s'awna................................of the followers of different  callings. this ed t of the carpe*»t rs is the ornament of the three worlds.......................  the following is the permanent agreement made by all the panchalas who had assembled, with- out a vacancy in the assembly, in fro-it of the god s'okkapperumaj :—in the nadus.........   the s'ak-» yea · corresponding to kshaya 13 given as 1180. but kshaya** u89.  bangalore taluq a 
 13  date? about 1200 a.d.   tamil —according to the stipulation made by tripurantaka-pperumaj embe-devar of tombalur alias teaimanikka-pattanam, of ilaippakka-uadu in irajaraja-sola-vala-nadu, five panama  are sanctioned  for lamps for two months. 
 14  date 1821 a.d.   tamil --this is the sacred marriage hall built  on the date specified  by tirukkanam ayya- mudeliyar's son vedagiri-niudeljyar for the god £ri-subbaraya-suvamiyar of aiasur,  the same repeated in telugu . 
 15  date 1876 a.d.   tamil — on the date specified , the pensioner s'arangu s'adupperi s'abapati-niudeliyar made a gift of this house for the festival in knrttigai of the god eri-s'omesvara-iuvami who has been pleased to reside in araia-ma-nagaram. 
 16  date 1410 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , at the time when the rajadhiraja raja-parameavara vira- deva-raya-ojeyar was ruling the whole empire :—boimnanna-öetti's son machirusa-setti had this dipamaie pillar made. 
 18  date ? 1303 a.d.  tarnil — this inscription is mostly gone .  while the  maha  mandalesvara,  tribhu vanamalla..... .. ............... on the date  specified  set up this stone............ 
 19  date 1524 a.d.  may it be prosperous.  in the year specified , in the time of krishna-raya,—singapa-nayaka granted for the offerings to the god in singapurs, the china bettahalji  village , to hiriaya varadar rajaya, son of timmanayya of pattana, of the ramanuja-kuta. 
 21  date 1342 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , when the pratapa-chakravartti hoysaja vira-ballaia-deva- rasa was in unnamale-pattana, ruling the kingdom of the world :«—all the subjects and farmers of elahaka-nad, and the maha-savantadhipati, champion over mustaches, chikka-bayiraya-nayaka's son honnamaraya-nayaka, granted to the nad-senabhova alaja, land  specified  at jekkur in this nad, as a sarvvamanya jcodagi, to continue as long as the sun and moon. 
 23  date 1305 a.d.   tamil —while posala vira-vallala-devar was pleased to rule the earth—  on the date specified  i, chakravatti-dcnnayakkar, son of perumal-deva-dennayakkar granted, with pouring of water, exempt from all imposts, tho wet and dry lands, including ponds,  bangalore taluq  tanks and all other kinds of land, and excluding former gifts, within the four boundaries of s'ivapura, situated in . .. palli, alias ganga-narayana-chaturvedi-mangalaun,—a village ? granted to me with pouring of water, as a sarva-manya, by the inhabitants of ilaippakka-nadu,—to ganga-narayaua- pperumal, periya kondabhatta and others.  usual final imprecatory sentence   {signed, in kannada  — alalanatha . 
 24  date 3 342 ad.  be it well.  on the date specified , when the praiapa-chakravartti hoysana vira-ballala- devarasa was in the city of unnamale, ruling a peaceful kingdom :—the maha-pasayita, champion oyer mustaches, chikka-bayireya-nayaka's brother-in-law choleya-nayaka, the great yelahaka-nad prabhu bayire-dera and others  named , granted to the maha-savantadhipati pemma-devarasa's son allayya, lands  specified , as a sarvvamanya hodage. 
 25  paie? about 1140 a.d.   the upper part is gone  ......fighting with hoysala-deva's dandanayaka udeyamayya in kidambur,—heggade macha-  gonda's son machi-deva pierced many and died. 
 26  date ? about 1430 a.d.  ... .when the maha-mandalesvara praudha-raya was ruling the kukkala-na^ ruler bukka-nayaka granted bommahalli in that nad, free of all imposts, for an agrahara, remitting the customs one way. imprecation. 
 27  date 1368 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , when the :naha-mandalesvara, subduer of hostile kings, champion other kings who break their word, master of the four oceans, bukkanna ...{rest effaced . 
 28  date 1530 a.d.  t 1  be it well.  on the date specified ,—in order that merit might be to achyuta-raya-maharaya and to our father basxvappa-nayaka,—harohalli, belonging to the sivanasamudra-sthala, which achyuta»raya favoured to sour basavappa-nayaka's son krishnappa-nayaka for his office of nayaka, have we granted for the decorations, illuminations and offerings of the god tiruvengalanatha of singapura, to be held by the ramanuja-kuta. 
 29  date 1349 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , a anneya-nayaka's son .. be-nayaka ... slew and fell. apparently repeated. bangalore taluq 9 
 30  date 1544 a.d.  best well.  on the date specified , when the raaharajadhiraja raja-paratnesvara vira-pratapa vira-sadaeiva-raya was ruling the kingdom of the world : -—the maha-maudalesvara, the marat vifchalesvara-deya-maha-arasu's agent rachur narasimhaya granted, for the offerings of the god allalanatha of jakkur, the allalasandra village in the sivanasamudra-aime of elahaka-nad, with all rights  specified ,—in order that merit might be to vithalesvara-arasu. 
 31  date 1340 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , when the pratapa-chakravartti hoysala vira-ballala-dev- area was in unnamale-pattana, ruling the kingdom of the world the great minister kameya- dandanayaka's son kameya-dannayaka granted to the nad-senabhova allaja the lands according to former custom belonging to the fort of haramaravur, as a sarvamanya kodage. 
 32  date about 1080 a.d.  be it well. when kulottunga-chola, the saune-nad ruler kadeya-nayaka's warrior, mummadi-setti's songuliyana's younger brother, rama-deva went forth for hunting, and in the hun t let fly  an arrow  at an old boar, he was wounded and killed.  apparently a grant was made for him . 
 34  date 1342 a.d.  t  be it well.  on the date specified , when the refuge of the three worlds, [favourite of earth and fortune], maharajadhiraja raja-parameavara, sun in the sky the yadava-kuia, crest-jewel a f  omniscience,......the pratapa-chakravartti hoysaja vira-ballala........was ruling......:—  a grant in elahaka-nad  details effaced  
 36  date about 750 a.d.  be it well. when s'ripuruslia-maharaja was ruling the kingdom of the earth called polettalvor, kukkara who was ruling bidirkkal in karika-nad, drove out the palikkari-nad people, and smiting the whole force of foot-soldiers, fell.  ambi-achari's son naga made this. 
 37  date ? about 980 a.d.  be it well. when indara was ruling,—dharmrnagudu, piercing ..........went to svargga.  a grant was made for bim. imprecation. 
 r 38  date about 1000 a.d.  a  be it well. madi-gamunda being......this periyur,—siriyura's son marasinga, when the cows  of inbatur were carried off, died. when chaura was ruling he died.  3 bangalore tftluq 
 39  date ? about 1250 a.d.  tamil;— the first part of this inscription is gone .  i granted, as a charitable gift in connection with a eraddha, all the wet and dry lands within  the four boundaries  given in detail  of.................., including the trees orerground and the wells  underground, and all the profits, to eleven brahmans of various gotras.  usual final imprecatory sentence . may there be prosperity. 
 40  dau about 820 a.d.  be it well. when permmanadi was ruling the kingdom of the earth :—and nojamba s'iva- mara was ruling morasu-nad ;—of the mahabali-vamsa, nijapa's son anniga received from both kings a aevabhoga, and for the increase of ... caused to be given 2 kandugas of land to trailoka- vira.  ereyappa and the brahmans of mangala are witnesses. kailasa-pandita wrote it. imprecation. to the nayaka 5 ploughs of land. 
 41  dau 1343 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , when the pratapa-chakravartti hoysaja vira-ballala- devarasa was in unnamale-pattana, ruling a peaceful kingdom ;—the maha-savantadhipati chikka- kajaya-nayaka, and all the farmers of kadagodi-sthala in the tract within the stream on the south side of the great sanue-nad, granted to the senabhova of this anne kingdom, perumbachari's  sob  satuvela alaja, a stone sasana as follows ;—all the wet and dry land according to former custom included within the four boundaries of hattandur in this sthala, have we granted as a sarvvamanya tsodige, for as long as sun and moon endure, making the grant with a stone aasana.  great good fortune. 
 42  date about 820 a.d.  be it well. for the setting up of ? s'iva bhima, the ninety-two granted land  specified . im- precation.  when ra amalla-permmanafli was ruling the kingdom was this erected. 
 43  date 1383 a.d.  tamil —in the 9th year of the reign of iramana-deyar—   on the date specified , irajaraja-karkata-marayar ganga-pperumal made a grant of land. 
 44  dau 1334 a.d.   tamil —during the rule over the earth of niesanka-pratapa posala vira-vallala-devar— the maha-vira-§amantadipati lakuma-nayakka's son kallaya-nayakka and vaichcba-gamunda ai d ctber in alitants  two more named  of turaivali-nadu, granted  on the date specified , for as bangalore taluq n  long as the moon and the sun endure, the tillages of pammasamudra and pammakirai as a htdangai, to ...... mara-kkavunda's son s'okkanna and s'elvandai.  then follow boundaries of the  tillages . 
 47  date 1346 α.ώλ   tamil —while the maha-mandalieura hariyappa-udaiyar was pleased to rule the earth- en the date specified , .....vallapa .. .. unayakkar, the maha-jana of irumbiliyftr and the  inhabitants  a few named  of veyur-nadu granted to s'evida-pergadaiyar,as a sarva-manya, the wet and dry lands within the four boundaries of udaiyaupalli, including the trees overground and the wells underground, and the taxes purvaya and apurvaya. 
 50  date 1451 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , at the time of an eclipse,—the maharajadhiraja raja-para- mesvara, master of the ... southern and western oceans, deva-raya-maharaya's son  rest effaced . 
 51  date 3301 a.d.*   tamil —-the pratapa-chakravatti sri-hoysaja-vira-vallala-devar intimates the following to the heads of matas and sthanikas in the temples situated in the hesar-kundani-kingdom, virivi-nadu, masandi-nadu, muraaa-nadu, s'okkanayan-parru, peunaiyandarmada-nadu, aimbulugur-nadu, elavur-nadu, kuvajala-nadu, kaivara-nadu, ilaippakka-nadu, and all other nidus :—   on the date specified , we have remitted all kinds of taxes, including the tax on looms, the tax on goldsmiths, tribute and tolls, hitherto paid in the gifts to temples, etc.—deva-danam, tiruvi- daiyattam, madappuram—of our kingdom and granted the same, with pouring of water, for certain gods, to provide for worship, offerings of rice, enjoyments and temple repairs.  accordingly, be pleased to take possession of the villages s'urikkuttai, s'ingaman-kuttai, kova-aamuttiram and others which are the tax-free temple property of the god s'omanatha-devar of kunjiyur, make adequate provision for worship, offerings of rice, enjoyments and temple repairs, and live happily, praying for the prosperity of ourselves and our kingdom. 
 52  date 1508 ad   telugu —be it well.  on the date specified , when the maha-rnandalesrara rajadhiraja raya- paramesvara......vira-pratapa vira-narasinga-raya-maharaya [was ruling] .........  imprecations. 
 53  date 1304 a.d.*   tamil —for victory to the sword and arm of the refuge of the whole world, favourite of earth and fortune, maharajadhiraja parameevara, lord of the excellent city of dvaravati, sun in the sky of  the s'aka year given is 1209 corresponding to vyaya. as hariyappa is mentioned as the king, 129 may be a mistake for 1269. 2  the kali year given as corresponding to the s'aka year 1224 is 3311. but it ought to be 4403. the corresponding kali year is gireii te 3649 which ought to be 440  bangalore taluq  the yadava family, creit-jewel of the all-knowing, king of the hill kings, champion over the hill chiefs, terrible to warriors, fierce in war, sole warrior, unassisted hero, s'imivara-siddhi, griridurga-mftlla a rama in firmness of character, a lion to the elephants his enemies, uprooter of the makara kingdom, establisher of the choja kingdom, raiser up of the pandya family, the fearless pratapa- chakravatti, hoeaia-sri-vira-biillala-devarasar—  the inhabitants of periya-na ju in masandi-nadu including pilla-gaminda, the superintendent of.. . vira-valla}a-deva-nadu, and the officers  some named  made the following grant for the god s'ivagange-u jaiya-nayanar :—  while vira-vallaja-devaraaar was ruling the earth, punishing the wicked and protecting the good, having taken his residence in doraaamuttira, after having led an expedition against the ariyaa in the north, destroyed the fort of nakkigundi and achieved victory—   on the date specified , we, the inhabitants of the nadu, granted, with pouring of water, to con- tinge for as long as the moon and the sun endure, the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries, including the trees overground and the wells underground, in the villages of nerkundi and eni- niarkkadappalli of our nadu, in order to provide for offerings of rice for the god s'ivageugai-udaiyar.  he who confiscates land, whether given by himself or by another, is born a worm in ordure for sixty thousand years.  usual final imprecatory sentence . this charity is under the protection of mahesvaras. may there be prosperity. 
 55  date about 750 a.d.  wh^n s'ripui-usha-maharaja was ruling:—.............mareya . . pierced and fell. 
 56  date 1366 a.d.   telugu —be it well.  on the date specified , nagasani,—the wife of narapa-setti, son of the great vadda-vt avahari, bava-sstti of g-undapalli in .. varika-nad, acquainted with both ways  or creeds ,—in order that her husband and other  relatives  for twenty-one generations might obtain merit,—had this tank constructed, to continue as long as sun and moon. 
 57  date 1532 a.d.  may it be prosperous. be it well.  on the date specified , when  with usual titles  achyuta- eaya-maharaya was ruling the kingdom of the world the chokkanahajli village in the sivana- samudra-sime belonging to the elahaka kingdom favoured by achyuta-raya-maharaya to kempa- devarasa for his office of nayaka, have we granted for the iraya temple of........ 
 50  date 1346 a.d.   tamil  —while the maha-mandalesvaras, subduers of hostile kings, champions over kings who break their word, sri-vira-ariyappa-udaiyar and bukkana-udaiyar were ruling the earth—  bangalore taluq.  13   οα the date specified , we—the great pat a-viyapari muttiyaraaan ilaman s'uvasa-nayakkar and the inhabitants of tentarru-turaivali-nadu in s'anai-na ju of rajendira-s'o]la-vaia-nadu in nigarili-s'ola-mandalam—granted, with pouring of water, certain lands  specified , together with the right to sell or mortgage, to gangadhara .... of sataua-kauaika-gotra, a resident of s'enji- agaram in ... chchi-ur-nadu of tonda-mandalam.  then follow boundaries of the lands granted  
 60  dai* 1337 a.d.  m   family —during the time that the pratapa-chakravatti hoeala-vira-vallala-devar was pleased to rule the earth—   on the date specified , we, the inhabitants of turaivali-nadu and vira-vallala-deva's son ... ya-nayakka, granted, with pouring of water, to continue for as long as the moon and the sun endure, the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries, including the trees overground and the  wells underground, in ..........·. ...of turaivali-nadu, to certain persons  named  at the rate of so  many shares  specified  each. we gave them  these lands  as a sarva-manya.  usual final impre- catory sentence , may there be prosperity. ramabhadra again and again entreats all future kings that they should from time to time protect this bridge of virtue, which is common to all kings. 
 61  date 1332 ä.d,  be it well.  on the date specified , by order of the maha-maudalesvara the hoysaneevara vira-ballala-deva chola-maharaja-raja,—beiaga bemeya-nayaka and others  named  with all the subjects and farmers, in order that tolavandi bommi-sett^s son bayire-setti's younger brother mukuti-setti as pattana-svami of chika-hudi might establish a fair, granted him a kodagi of land  specified , with dues, tolls and other payments  specified . signatures.  llastana jakana wrote it. the engraver of this sasana was engoja's son bairoja. 
 63  date 1332 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , by order of the maha-mandalesvara vira-ballala-deva,— various lands  specified  were granted as kodage to be}aganchi mayi-nayaka's ...... machi-garuda. 
 64  date 1793 a.d.   on the date specified , atupakam annamale-mudaliyar's lawful wife venkatanima's dharma- chhatra was enlarged by her eldest son raya-bahadur ratna-sabhapat'-mudaliyar in memory of his senior uncle venkatachala-mudaliyar's lawful wife mangatayi-amma. 
 64  date 1793 a.d.  the same in tamil.  4  bangalore tahjq 
 65  date 1301 a.d.   tamil —the pratapa-chakravatti sri-hoysala-vira-vailala-deva intimates the following to the heads of matas and sthanas in the temples situated in the hesar-kundani-kingdom, virivi-naduj masandi-nadu, murasu-nadu, s'okkanayan-parru, pennaiyandar-mada-nadu, aimbujugur-nadu, elavur-nadu, kuvalala-nadu, [kaivara-nadu], ilaippakka-nadu and all other nidus :—   on the date specified , we have remitted all kinds of taxes, including tribute, present, the tax on looms, the tax on goldsmiths, and tolls, hitherto paid in the gifts to temples, etc—deva- aanam, tiruvidaiyattam^ madappuram and pallichchandam—οΐ our kingdom and granted, with pouring of water, certain ? vibhavas for certain gods, to provide for worship, offerings of rice, enjoyments and temple repairs.  accordingly, be pleased to take possession of the villages  four named  and separate pieces of land, which are a deva-dana of the god s'embiavaram-udaiya-nayanar of tamaraikkarai in veppur-parru, make adequate provision for worship, offerings of rice, enjoyments and temple repairs, and live happily, praying for [the prosperity of ourselves and our kingdom.] 
 66  date 1366 a.d.   tamil —the order of tandisvara. in the sea-girt earth, the? ruler kandichchuran did charity in former times. 1 will unhesitatingly place on my head the feet of him who protects the charity of another.   from the date specified , we—the maha-ganas, the heads of matas and sthanas, the reciters of the vedas, the temple manager  darma-hattar  s'embandai, the pujaris vaitti-battar, madeva- battar and their sons, mara-battar and his sons, the kaikkolar  ? weavers^ of the fine temple at ? kavarippina, the ? mulachehedi sri-virabattira and the servants performing various duties, from the pujan at the top to the scavenger at the bottom^-having assembled on the seat of justice, agreed among ourselves to measure out a certain quantity  specified  of paddy and pay certain taxes  named  to sri-rudra-sri-maheevara of chitrameli perukkalan-dirukkavanam residing in the temple of s'oma-isvaram-udaiyar of tamaraikkirai in the northern division of veppur of maaandi-nadu in kajendira-sola-vala-nadu of nigarili-sola-mandalam. .................. 
 67  date 1365 a.d.   tamil —during the time that the maha-mandalesvara, subduer of hostile kings, champion over kings who break their word, ari-vira-bukkanna-udaiyar's [son kempanna-udaiyar was ruling the earth—   on the date specified , eri-rudra-eii-mahesvara of chitrameli peruttalan-diruttavanarn,1  the temple manager  danma-kattar  s'embandai-deva's sone tambana............ painma-batta's  sons, s'onna-batta's sons and............, having assembled on the seat of justice in the temple of  s'embisvaram-udaiyar of tamaraikkarai ............ veppur-nadu in rajendra-sola-vala-nadu of  nigarili-s'ola-raandalam, gave the following grant to ......son s'omana-devar of the kaufcka-  gotra:—  i, the tana-pati tambana-jiyar having received full payment in gold, gave, with pouring of  water, full possession of one-third of the lands  specified  which i had purchased from ........  eon mudali, to s'omana-devar. witness—hariyapparayar.  perukkalan-dirukkavacam in the previous no.  bangalore taluq  15 
 68  date 1247 a.d.   tamil — on the date specified , for the success of the arm and sword of............. i  s'embandai......of tamaraikkirai, granted certain lands  specified  to a certain number of persons   named  at the rate of so many shares  specified  each for reciting the vedas in the temple of seyamieuram-udaiya-nayanar. they shall enjoy these shares for as long as the moon and the sun endure.   usual final imprecatory sentence .  pemmattaiyar of veppur granted some lands  specified  below the big tank of vengajur for the god s'embaauram-udaiya-nayanar. i, kudal-amattiya's son amattiyan, ? renewed the grant of the above lauds for as long as the moon and the sun exist.   usual final imprecatory sentence . 
 69  date ? about 1300 a.d.  tamil -—to the god s'okkapperumal of tombalur .... 
 70  ...... date ? about 1600 a.d.  at the feet of this  god  basavesvara the river called vrishabhavati rose, and flowed with its stream to the west. 
 71  date ? 1394 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , when the maha-mandalesvara vira-lmmadi-bukkanna's .. .. son ... vira .... was ruling the kingdom :—·. .. nayaka  rest illegible . 
 72  date ? about 1350 a.d.   tamil —we, pamma-battar and s'embu-battar, having received full payment in gold, gave to pijlaiyar full possession of the land and the house which had been ours for a long time and trans- feared to him the service for fifteen days ......... in the temple of this god, which we had pur- chased from kujainja-battar.  the signatures of pamma-battar and s'ernbu-bat$ar. witnesses to the grant: varadi-deva- kon and s'okkannan. 
 73  date 1381 a.d.   tamil —while the destroyer of hostile kings, the maha-mandalesvara sri-vira-hariyappa-udai- yar was at s'annai mujavayil—   on the date specified , i, ...... piramata .. .. , champion over traitors to their lords, made a  grant of lands  this portion is gone  for the god s'ivanesvaram-udaiya-nayanar of velur in turaivali- nadlu.  usual final imprecatory sentence . 
 74  date about 1300 a.d.   tamil —this inscription gives merely the usual hoysaja titles without mentioning any king, and ends thus—we granted, with pouring of water.  16 bangalore taluq 
 75  date 1301 a.d.   tamil — from the date specified , the inhabitants of periya-nadu in s'aruga-naflu, the superintendents of vira-vallala-deva-na ju, s embi-devar and villa-gamundar, and several others  named  seem to have made some grant. ^  date 1306 4.d.   tamil —while the pratapa-chakravartti eri-posaia-vira-vallala-devaraean was pleased to rule the earth—   from the date specified , we granted, with pouring of water, as a deva-dana for the god villisvaram-udaiyar of villaganiundanpaui, the village of s'attaidevanpalh in erumarai-nadu, the tank avanjikattu of the village and all the wet and dry lands adjoining the village, including the wells underground and the trees overground within their four boundaries, in order to provide for worship, sacred service and offerings of rice. this village shall continue as a sarva-manya.  usual final imprecatory sentence .  villa-gamunda's son seems to have made a grant of the village, excluding the portion of the cultivators, as a aeva-dana, exempt from taxes, to......yandai.............. 
 77  date about 1310 a.d.   tamil —for victory to the sword and arm of the pratapa-chakravatti vira-vallala-devar—·  we, the inhabitants of ku.. .. nadu and periya-nadu remitted certain taxes  named  .... 
 78  date 1495 a.d.  may it be prosperous.  on the date specified , linga-rahuta is son lingana granted .. ngade- pure of jakasandra, two parts for the god naganatha of blur and one part for the god channa- kesava. imprecations. 
 79  date about 870 a.d.  be it well. in the victorious year of the s'rirajya, under satyavakya-permmatfi's kali-yuga hanuman, nagattara,—the irvvuliyur odeya, irugamayya's son siriyamayya, fixed sluices to the two tanks, had the eastern tank built, and obtained the bittuvatta of the three tanks. imprecation. 
 80  date 1515 a.d.  may it be prosperous. be it well.  on the date specified , at the time of an eclipse of the m00dj—when krishna-eaya-maharaya was ruling the kingdom of the world :—sivannapa-nayakaj in order that dharma might be to his father, granted a field to provide for keeping up a cart for the agra tank. 
 8 81  date 1363 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , when  with usual titles  vira bukkanna-vodeyar's son kampauna-vodeyar was in the city of mujubagil, ruling the kingdom of the world :—that bangalore taluq  17  kampanna-vodeyar's son kamaiya-nayaka, in the presence of the farmers of this kingdom, granted to elahaka-nad allala-jiya's son tanniyappa, lands in belartta of the torevali-nad of the south of the .... nti-nad, as a sarvamanya-kodage. 
 82  date 1426 a.d.  having the supreme profound syad-vada as a fruit-bearing token, may it prevail, the doctrine of the lord of the three worlds, the jina doctrine.  be it well.  on the date specified , of the sri-mula-sangha, desiya-gana, kondakundanvaya and pustuka-gachha, pra.....siddhanti-deva's disciple subhachandra-siddhanti-deva's lay-disci- pale chakkimayya'8  son  nagiya kariyappa-dandanayaka.............when ruling morasti-nad,  made a grant  effaced  for the kaliyur agrahara, that the chokkimayya jinalaya might continue as long as sun and moon. imprecations. 
 83  date about 890 j.p.1  be it well. when,—a spotless moon in the sky the ganga-kuia praised in all the world, the self-chosen lord of the lakshmi of sovereignty over the earth decorated at her waist with a a me of the wide circle of the waters of the ocean, his greatness adorned with the ornament of these and a host of countless virtues,—srimad efeyapparasa, having made all his enemies powerless, was ruling the gangavadi ninety-six thousand under the shadow of one umbrella .—on ordering nagattara along with his feudatories and the army to ayyapa-deva in order to fight against bira-mahendra,— fighting in tumbepadi, when the battle was losing ground, going close up among the elephants, he slew and died.  hearing that, ereyapa was pleased, and binding the jstagattara crown on iruga, gave him the bempur twelve, secured by a sasana, as a hilnad. those are as follows :—kempuru, tovaguru, puvina-pullimangala, kutanidu-nalluru, nalluru, kotnarangundu, iugaluru, d igmonel- malli-galanjavagilu, saramu, elkunde, paravuru, kudal. thus much, with the fields and boundaries, did ereyapa give for the dutiful naga[tta]ra. great good fortune, 
 85  date ? about 1300 a.d.   tamil — on the date specified , for the benefit of my father s'embandai-jiyar, i, vauala-jiyar,  made a grant for the god tirunag?s^arani-udaiya.....-.to provide for offer, nos of rice, sandal  and other requirements, and for a procession during the festival in the month of s'lttirai.  usual final imprecatory sentence . this grant is under the protection of mahesvaras. 
 85&  date about 1262 a.d.   tamil —i, rajaraja-karkata-maharaja s'okkanayan, granted the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries in the village of orriyavanpalli for the god tirunagiivaram-udaiya mahadevar.  απ the lower part of the stone is taken up with an elaborate piece of rude but inter tins sculpture representing the battle to which the inscription refers and the admission of the hero to paradise. see mysore inscriptions, frontispiece ; or better, jsp- ind. vi, 4ß. the stone is now in the bangalore museum.  18 bangalore taluq. 
 85  date ? about 1110 a.d.   tamil —during the rule of poysala-deva :—tamattandan, alias murasu.....rajan, son  of murasu-nad-alvar, terrible to titled kings, who was the son of s'ola-velar—-one of the gamundas of murasu-nadu in rajendira-s'ojta-vaja-nadu of mudigonda-s'ola-mandalam—granted certain lands  specified  below the big tank of'veppur as a devadana, caused a surrounding wall tobe built at a cost of 500 pon, and gave certaiti hands to periyandan, alias narpattennayira-battan, son of era-battan, for conducting the duties of superintendent of the matha  madapattiyam  in this temple.................   usual final imprecatory sentence and final phrase . 
 86  date ? about 1270 a.d. tamil — this inscription has no beginning .  .......pakkam-udaiyan's son aï.agiyar set up  the image of  a goddess to be taken out in  procession in the streets............ vilakkavayiran gave a lamp-stand weighing eighteen   ?palams . 
 87  date about 900 a.d.  be it well. nagattara's house-manager  mane-magadin  pegura went to svargga and the other world. 
 88  date about 900 a.d. nagattara's daughter tondabbe, ending her time in the manner appointed, died. 
 90  date about 1400 a.d.  be it well, for the god nagaresvara, behui- challandi-settr's son gaudu-sonnappa gave vessels  namely —a tray, a tripod, a bowl for the wave-offering of perfume and incense, and a conch-shell. 
 91  date 1294 a.d.  tamil —in the 4th year of the reign of the universal em peror ari-posala-vira-ramanada- devar—  ab there had been no provision made formerly for offerings of rice for the god kadikandiya. suram-udaiya-nayanar —to provide for offerings of rice for the god, i, kulottunga-s'ola-tagadadi- rayar mara-s'ika-devar, granted  from the date specified , to continue for as long as the moon and the sun exist, certain quantities  specified  of paddy from lands situated in different villages  named .  usual final imprecatory sentenced 
 lb  date ? about 1300 a.d.  tamil — this is only a fragment .  some one seems to have given water cups, incense-burner, lamp, bell and conch-shell to some temple. this charity is under the protection of maheevnras. bangalore taluq.  19 
 93  date ? about 950 a.d.  ......parmmanandi-bhattaraka had this stone set up for ravikanti-siddhanti, who was  mankabbe-kanti. 
 94  date about 900 a.d.  may prosperity be to the jina sasana. srimat nagattara's daughter tondabbe, performing aanyasanam, expired.  
 95  date ? about 950 a.d.   the first part is nearly effaced .  .....raya's son .... disciple of ....,—kumaranandi-bhatara, with his face towards  kamapura and madambapattana of the bide-kanda, according to custom wandering about........ 
 96  date! 1402 a.d.  obeisance to samba-s'iva. copper sasana of a gift. obeisance to s'iva. obeisance to s'ambhu &c.  in order to understand the meanings of words do i adore the parents of the world, parvati and paraniesvara, united like a word and its meauing.  be it well.  on the date specified , to tryambaka namassivaya, of the guru-kula, priest of  with numerous praises  the god nagaresvara of nimbapuri in the bhaskara-kshetra, who appeared to kalikala-chola,—the maharajadhiraja raja-paramesvara raja-pratapa, a lion among kings, master of the northern southern eastern and western four oceans, champion ov\?r.. chieftains, a spear for the head of malava-raya, a ganla-bherunda to hostile kings, the vira-s'aiva vira-pratapaohola- raya having made a representation to  with an immense number of epithets  certain settis  named , the heads of the caste,—they agreed to a grant of the following payments ;—for the worship, festivals and all ceremonies of the god nagaresvara, all those of the gotras of a thousand rishis, settled that for those of their third caste, wherever they may be, they should pay 1 hand per house per annum ; and for a marriage, 2 hana. imprecations.  list of places to which this applies ; and directions for honourable treatment of the bearers of this aasana when they come to collect the dues. 
 97  date 1347 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , when the maha-mandaleavara, subduer of hostile kings, champion oyer kings who break their word, vira-hariyappa-vodeyar was ruling the kingdom of the world :-—.. .. ... the ... kali-nad prabhu gaudapa's son honnapa granted. - .„ as a jcodage, with  all the taxes  specified . imprecations. 
 98  date 1298 a.d.  tamil— on the date specified , i, ir jaira^a-r arkata-maharajan, granted, with pouring of water, as a madappuram, the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries, including the wells   bangalore taluq  underground and the trees overground, in the village of vamayanpalli of veppur-pajru, to the emperor of ascetics s'ivajnana-pauditar s'embi-jiyar. he shall enjoy  these lands  for as long as the moon and the sun endure,  usual final imprecatory sentence.  he shall have this grant engraved on copper and stone. the signatures of vettaiyir-chokkar, nirukkanatti-udaiyar and elumbodar. 
 99  date 1262 a.d.   tamil — on the date specified , i, raiaraja-karkata-maharaja s'okkanayan, granted, for......  tribuvanamalla-puradirayar, alias tamatta......, the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries,  including tanks and ponds, in the village of udayasamuttiram, to the mahajanas-. .. including the pujaris ilayavilli-alvar, balendu-mauji.......and gangaya-vibudhan......... 
 100  date ] 294 a.d.   tamil —in the 4th year of the reign of the universal emperor ari-poyeala-vira-iramana-devar—  on the date specified , i, irajairaja-karkata-maharajari tauiattama .. , granted, as a charitable gift, for feeding brahmans, anumasamuttiram and unangimaran-kuttai, situated within the boundaries of veppur, together with the adjoining wet and dry lands with their four boundaries, including the wells underground and the trees overground, to the 28 men of this village who should conduct the duties of tanapatis.  then follow names of the 28 men .  i, tamattamavar, made the above grant, with pouring of water, as a charitable gift, to the 28 men, with the right to sell or give away  the lands , for the benefit of the kings sacred body and of myself.  this charity shall last as long as the moon and the sun.  usual final imprecatory sentence .  
 101 date 1361 a.d.  tamil — on the date specified , vallappa-dennayakkar, one of...... .. of the maha-manda-,  esvara, the champion over kings who break their word, ariyappa-udaiyar, and the inhabitants of veppur nadu—s'okkayappan and others  a few named —seem to have made a grant. 
 102  date? 1320 a.d.   tamil —this inscription records a grant of lands, exempt from taxes, to appar, son of ulagiyalvar.  usual final imprecatory sentence . 
 104  date 1879 a.d.   telagu —obeisance to ramanuja. joined to the sacred feet  *. e. the disciple  of the estab- lister of the path of the vedas, promoter of both vedanta  the sanskrit and the dravida , tiruko- vilur yatirajasvami,—trisirapura toreyur poli-setti's  son —to krishnappa-nayini's sons nara- simhalu-nayini and perumalu-nayini, the brother,—subrayalu-nayadu,  on the date specified , gained the holy place of the sacred feet of the acharyas  i. e. died . bangalore taliiq. 21 
 105  date ?1652 a.d.  may it be prosperous.  ια the year specified , channappanna-ayya's agent yallapa-nayaka remitted the marriage tax in the saraki-sime, for all castes in the bhandaruda village, and the villages belonging to the amrapura temple. imprecation. 
 106  date 1851 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , in the presence of mari-vrisbabhendra-svami established at the one-leafed ulm tree of the bande-matha, —adorned with all titles, krishna-raja-vadeyar of the mysore state made a grant for the service of the mafka.   
 108  date about ]060 a.d,   tamil — this inscription is incomplete and contains only a portion of the historical intro- duction, which gives neither the name of the king nor the regnal year.   be it well. [in the year of the reign of ko-pparakesarivarmar, alias sri-rajendra-devar, who,—] having made the two noble ladies—the goddess of fortune and the goddess of the earth— his great queens ; raised.... his brilliant white umbrella ; destroyed the strong kali ; and bestowed beautiful crowns, set with jewels vying with one another in brilliancy, on his fathers younger brother gangaikonda-solan of overpowering strength, with the title the proud irumadi-solan ; among his younger brothers of warlike strength, on the irate mummadi-solan, with the title sola-pandiyan, whose valour destroys enemies on the battle-ueld ; on vira-solan, the lord of koli,1 who wore the warriors ankle-rings, with the title karikala-solan, the lord of the ancient earth ; on maduranta- kan, whose strong and broad hand wielded the sword in warfare, with the title s'ola-gangan ; on the good paranta-devau, endowed with strength of shoulders, with the title s ola- a yyoddhyarajan · among his sons, whom he affectionately cherished in his generous heart, on irajendra-s'olan praised on this earth, with the title uttama-s'olan ; on mudigonda-s'olan, who wore a garland made of a cluster of flowers and of fine opening buds, with the title s'ola-janakarajan of great valour, in whom the glory of the race of the sun rests; on irattapadikonda-s'olan, who maintained the dignity of pure tamil, with the title s'ola-vallaban ; among the sons of his sons, on madurantakan, who wore sounding ankle-rings, brilliant as the sun, with the title s'undara-s'olan ; and on the peerless anaichchevagan, whose hand held a strong bow, with the title nirupendra-s plan ;—was resplendent on earth; and who—when the impetuous and angry s'alukki ahavamalla,—having heard the report that the valavan  the chola king , desirous of war, had marched upon iratta-mandalam of  superior strength, and had destroyed its fame.........and many districts and towns,—exclaimed  this is a disgrace to me !", sprang up, his eyes burning with rage, went to the beautiful great tirtha koppam, and commenced hostilities, though the shower of ahavamalla's straight arrows pierced his elephants forehead and his own thighs and mound-like shoulders, and though the warriors wearing ankle-rings, who had mounted the warlike elephant along with him, fell,—not minding all this, directed  against the enemy  many matchless warlike weapons and sent to heaven jayaeingan, the younger brother of the valorous chalukki, the warlike pulakesi, the fgarland-wear- ing dasapanman ; among proud princes, the maudalika  a sokan, araiyan of great renown.....  mottayan, who wore a garland of opening buds full of honey, the unfailing nanni-xulamban. and  uraiyur  warriore, neer trichinopoly   6 22  bangalore taluq.  other princes without number ; whereupon the terrified s'aiukki, having been utterly routed, along with the steady revan, tuttan, armed with a spear, gundamayyan, whose hand held a death- dealing weapon, and many other furious princes, fled, with dishevelled hair, looking behind, with a bent back,.......................................· 
 110  date 1336 a.d.  be it well. when,  with usual and other titles, including  a spear for the head of the malava king, a bairava to the gurjjara kings minister  vajtr , a brahma-rakshasa to hemmira-raya, the form of ...to adava-raya, the establisher of the chola king, the setter up of the pandya king, rooter up of the magara king, displacer of the kadava king,—poysala vira-narasinga-deva's son vira- ballala-devarasa was in the residence of dorasamudra, ruling the kingdom of the earth in the enjoy, ment of all manner of pleasures :— on the date specified , when the maha-eamantadhipati, champion over the world of men, meyile-nayakachenneya-nayaka was ruling the kukkala-nad;—the kukkala- nad maha-prabhu...honna-gauda's son and others  named  granted the ...... village as a sarbha-  manya-hodege, with all rights and taxes  specified . imprecations.  written bv the seuabhova jakkanna. 
 j 111  date 1340 a.d.  be it well.  on the date specified , when  with usual titles, including  consumer of the forest seuna-kaya's army, terrifier of chola, gaula, and gurjjara, a rudra of the last deluge to  ïelunga-raia, a wild-fire in burning up----kadava-raya, the poysala pratapa-chakravartti  vishnuvarddhana vira-ballala-deva was ruling the kingdom of the earth in peace and wisdom :— when performing his anointing to the kingdom, in the year vikrama, the kings sod,—the maka- samantadhipati, champion over the world of men, kodiya-nayaka's son  with numerous epithets  mayileya-nayaka's younger brother chenneya-nayaka, for the support of ... animals, cattle, birds, and sail other living beings, and the service at all times of  the goddess  ganga-devi, made the ramasamudra  tank  as a work of merit, expending 3000 honnu, in order that mayileya-nayaka chenneya-nayaka may rule the earth in peace as long as the sun and moon endure ; and had this stone sasana of this work of merit inscribed. benedictions and imprecations.  the nadsenabhova kesava-deva's son ananthanna's writing.  
 112  date 1156 a.d.  tamil —during the rule of sri-narasinga-poysala-devar.—   on the date specified , achchalaiyan, the perhadi of kukkal-nad-alvar's kingdom, on the  occasion of an attack on his town tippur by murasadi...... and many gamundas of the nadu,  having defended his town and killed many, fell.  machchi-devar........, caused this stone to be set up... »......... 
 114  date about 1262 a.d.  be it well. dharma granted by rajaraja ka[ra]kada«maraya chokka-naya. the talegatur sivapura is granted to muttina kamayya and all the other maheevaras. forms long as sun and moon endure. imprecation. bangalore taluq. 23 
 114 and 1151  date about 1262 a.d.   tamil —i, rajaraja-kakkata-marayan s'okkanayan, granted talaigattur s'ivapuram, together with the wet and dry lands within its four boundaries, to mutton kamayan and other mahesvaras.  usual final imprecatory sentence . s'ogudaiyan shall ? improve and enjoy certain lands  specified . then follow names of the donees and details of the shares . i, kama-devar, will exact a fine from and expel from his gritti any man who either leaves s'ivapuram for good, or slanders another, or commits adultery. s'uriya-deva gets ten kulaga of wet land. 
 116  date? 1578 a.d.   in the year specified , the great champion over the three kings, bammaya-nayaka made to his guru battarayya a grant of the tumvalarahalli village. its boundaries. imprecations. 
 117  date 1339 a.d.  be it well. when  with usual titles  the pratapa-chakravartt hoysana vira-narasimha-deva's son vira-ballala-deva was in dorasamudra, ruling the kingdom of the world;— on the date specified  when the maha-samantadhipati, lord of the world of men, koteya-nayaka's son mayileya-nayaka channeya-nayaka s son koteya-nayaka was ruling kukkala-nad;—the prabhu of that kukkala-nad  rest effaced .  date 1705 a.d.  may it be prosperous. be it well.  on the date specified , when the rajadhiraj a raja-paramee- vara praudha-pratapa apratima-narapati, born in the atreya-gotra, mahieur-nag ara deva-raja. vaderaiya's son, kanthirava-narasa-raja-vaderayya, seated on the throne of s rirangapattana, was ruling the empire of the world :—for the offerings and illuminations of the god yenkatesvara which his father had caused to be newly set up in the fort of bengalur belonging to his government, he made a grant of kottanur in gottegere belonging to the fort of bengalur, together with its hamlets kolatapura, tidadahalh and bilapp;mahalli, altogether 4 villages, with all rights. imprec ations. ^  date 134 a.d.   in the year specified , jinjanna-nayaka's son jakkanna-nayaka, in the time of ballala-raya, gave kattu-nayaka's jaddapura to patalablioji-vodeyar's son siddayaii-vodeyar, within the four boundaries belonging to xatta-mallikanunarayapura. imprecations. the engraver of the sasana was avarigere naloja's son basava-voja. 
 122 date 1408 a.d.  best well.  on the date specified , when the maharajadhiraja raja-paramesvara vira-deva- raya-maharaya was ruling the kingdom of the world :—the adhikari hay akasa made for the god  ^his tamil version partly precedes und partly follows the kannada version no. 114   badgalore taluq  tirumalenatha of kanneiii in kukkala-nad a grant of two looms, free of tax. usual final verses. 
 123  date 1495 a.d.  may it be prosperous. be it well.  on the date specified , when the ma ha-mandaleavara, champion over the mustaches of the world, kathari-salva, saliva immadi-narasinga-raya-maha- raya was ruling the kingdom of the world :—the maha-mandalesvara gode-raya  with various epithets  made, to the sons of timmarasa, the temple priest of vakkejallimangala and others  named , at the time of an eclipse of the sun, a grant of the gangadihalli village in kukkala-nad belonging to his nayakship, giving it another name timmannarajapura, as an agrahara,—in order that merit might be to immadi-narasinga-raya-maharaya,-—with all rights. 
 126  date about 1650 a.d.  the elavakka-nad prabhu .... ? chennaya-gauda granted to [yesavanta]pura kempa- gauda as a twdage .. 
 127  date 1431 a.d. obeisance to ganadhipati. obeisance to s'ambhu &c.  be it well.  on the date specified , when the m ihariya raja-parameavara vira-vijaya- bhupati-raya-maharaya's son deva-raya mahariya, on the throne of vijayanagara, was ruling the kingdom of the world in peace and wisdom by the personal order of that deva-raya-maha- raya,—for the offerings and decorations of  the gol  some-deva in front of the town in sakana- samudra,—the great minister mangappa-dannayaka s son pratapa-raya granted a dharma-sasana as follows for the offerings and decorations of the god some have we granted the virupakshapura village, whose rental is 20 honnu,—a hamlet of devasamudra in the yelahanka-nad, belonging to and under s'ivanasamudra granted for our office of nayaka,—making it vijajaclevarayapura, and with that devaray apura, land  specified  under the old tank of devasamudra,—at the time of the eclipse of the sun,—in order that long life, health and increase of wealth may be to deva-raya- maharaya, and from love to paramesvara. details of the rental, of the ceremonies to be performed, and of the seven persons to be employed to minister to the god. usual final verses.  written by pratapa-raya. 
 129  date 1342 a.d.  best well.  on the date specified , wh  n th a pratapa-chakravartti hoysala vira-ballala- devarasa was in the city of unnamale, ruling the kingdom in peace and wisdom :—the nobleman  ekhatiga  of his house, the maha-samantadhipati,   champion over mustaches, chikka-bayireya- nayaka and a number of others  named , with all the farmers, made to nagavara maragonda's marapa a grant of nagisettiyahalli with half the lands under the old tank of that village, as a lodage, for as long as the sun and moon endure. 
 132  date 1376 α.ώλ   tamil --while the maha-mandalesvara, deslrov r of hostile kings, champion over kings who bank their word, lord of the eastern southern western and northern oceans, suratrana  sultan  of saka 1290 is given as corresponding; to the cyclic year nala. but mala  s'aka 1299.  bangalore taluq 25  the hindu rajas, the maharaja parametra sn-nra-bakkanna-idaiyar wa? pleased to rule the earth—   on the date specified , i—the oiaha-satnantadhipati, champion over the three kings, champion over kings who break their word, mayalaya-nayakar's sou devaya-nayakkan -granted, with pouring of water, to continue as a sarva-mmya for as long as the moon and the sun endure, certain lands   specified  in devasamudra, alias.....palli, of ilaippakka-nadu, to a number of brahmans of  various gotras.  usual final imprecatory sentence and final sanskrit verse . 
 133  date 1307 a.d,   tamil — from the year specified , f r victory to the sword and arm of the pratapa-chakravatti sri-posala-vira-vallala-devar, and for the baneafc of vallappa-dennakkar, we—the maha-praeayitta ninran, the superintendent of the ? wesfcera portion of masandi-nadu, s'embi-devar, villa-gamundar and other  three named  inhabitants of the nidu, and kovaudai—having cleared the jungle in the tract of land adjoining peru-erumur, ? levelled the ground, built a village, constructed a tank by ? removing the sand, and namodthe village vachchidevarpuram, granted to vachchi-devar the village and the wet and dry lands adjoining it, with their four boundaries, as a madappuram, exempt from taxes, for as long as the moon and the sun exist.  usual final imprecatory sentence .  the signature of ninran. the signature of the accountant of the nadu, periyapiljai. 
 134  date 1308 a.b.  be it well. when the pratapa-chakravartti hoysala vira-ballaia-oevarasa was ruling a peaceful kingdom : —and the great [minister] devanna's [son] mudeya allapa-dandanayaka was ruling elahaka-nad the sarvvadhikari uriyanna, with all the chief farmers, made a grant of land  effaced  at hebala to ......  in the year specified . imprecations. 
 136  date ? 1689 α.ώλ   in the year specified , we, marige-gauda, will give to any one for this  idakjce  10 hana, 5 hana, 6 hana. at this rate the nad-satmbova ... kola nachap pa will ... the gauda's paddana. imprecation. 
 137  date ? 1676 a.d.   in the year specified , rupa-deva-rani's son balleya-raya-rani granted to samudradakote dasa's son nammaluvar, as a dasoha, and  specified  under the old tank of hebbala belonging to our office of nayaka, and in other places  specified . imprecation. 
 138  date 1538 a.d.   on the date specified , when achynta-raya-maharaya was on a secure throne :—mecharasaya made a grant in anupe.... in the sivanasamudra-sime. imprecation.  1 the purport of this inscription is unintelligible. 26  bangalore taluq 
 139  bate 1386 a.b.   on tie date specified , when the maha-mandalesvara, subduer of hostile kings, champion over kings who break their word, vira-hariyappa-vodeyar bukkanna-vodeyar was ruling a secure kingdom :—the maha-samantadhipati, champion over the world of men, mayileya-nayaka's son koteya-kayaka made to bankodi deva-perumal's son kharyya-deva a grant of jubanahalli in the yalahaka-nad, as a sarvamanya-ttodage. 
 139  bate ? 1237 a.b.1   tamil —during the rule of the emperor of the whole world poysala-vira-narasinga-devar—in the time of mannimanavadai-udai-gandan s'ikka-devar of ilaippakka nadu,—i, periya-treloka- eettiyan, built  in the year specified  the tower of the temple of the god s'ivanisvaram-udaiyar, and granted some land, exempt from taxes, to s ola-bhatta's son kanka-battan. i, vairi-battan, had the work of the vimana done............................ 
 139   date ? 1273 a b.   tiiis inscription is fragmentary    tamil — in the year specified , some pradamn  minister  seems to have made a grant, with pouring of water, to provide for offerings of rice for some god of.. .. rama-chchaturvedi- mangalam. 
 139  bate ? 1286 a.b.  c this is also fragmentary    tamil —it seems to record a grant of lands by the mahajanas of some place to provide for oil for lamps etc. for some god. 
 140  date ? about 700 a.bß   έ1βρ7ιαηί on the seal   be it twell. from the victorious residence of kalinga-nagara, which was like amarapura  the city of the gods , devoted to worship of the lotus feet of the divine gokarna-svami,—who is set up on the pure peak of the mahendra mountain, master  guru  of things movable and immovable, the sole architect  sutradhara  for the creation of all the world, bearing the moon as his crest,—having raised the shout of victory in the struggles of many battles, his two feet illuminated with the rays from the groups of jewels in the crests of the circle of all the feudatories prostrated by his valour, the maharajadhiraja paramesvara sri-rajendravarma's son sal devendravarma-deva, being in good health,  thus  commands the householders residing in the  sidhata village and its neighbourhood in yarahavartani :—be it known to you that this village,_  for the worship, incense and offerings of paramesvara-parama-bhattaraka,—to ratuka, a resident a  the kali year 4343 is given as corresponding to hevilambi. but kali 4343 lava ; and hevilambi  kali 4339. perhaps 1237 a. d. is meant ; but this year does not fall within the reign of narasimha ii  1220-1235 .  3  the inscription contains many mistakes.  bangalore taluq  27  of palukosu, of the kateya-sutra, performer of the five vows,—-in order  that merit, long life and glory may be to our mother, father and ourselves,—at the time of the sankravti. with pouring of water, has been given, its boundaries are here written  details of boundaries .  by navanitarasi-guru, dwelling in s'riparvata, was this established for the srotriya.  as to this are the verses delivered by vyasa ;—by many kings has the earth been enjoyed, sagara and others ; whosesoever is at the time the land, his is then the fruit. whoso takes away land given by himself or by another is born a worm in ordure and with his fathers cooked.  written by utnina srikhandi. 
 141  date? m a.d.  be it well. success through the adorable padmanabha. resembling  in colour  the cloudless sky.  a sun illumining the clear firmament of the jahnavi  or ganga -kula, possessed of a kingdom sprung from the swift victory of his arm, adorned with the ornament of a wound received in cutting down in battle the hosts of his cruel enemies, of the kanvayana-sa-gotra, was srimat konganivarmma- dharmma-mahadhirjah.  mis son, inheriting the qualities of his father, possessing a character for learning and modesty, having obtained the honours of the kingdom only for the sake of the good government of his subjects, a touchstone for  tasting  gold the learned and poets, skilled among those who expound and practise the science of ρdlitics in all its branches, having well distributed faithful servants, author of a treatise on the law of adoption  aattaha, sutraj, was srimat madhava-mahadhirajah.  his son, uniting the qualities of his father and grandfather, having entered into war with many elephants  so that  his fame had tasted the waters of the four oceans, of wonderful skill acquired from riding rutting elephants and horses, distinguished for wealth gained through the four modes of attack, was srimad harivarmma-mahadhirajah,  his son, devoted to the worship of gurus, cows and brahmans, meditating on the feet of narayana, was srimad vishnugopa-mahadhirajah.  his head purified by the pollen from the lotuses the feet of tryambaka, his two arms grown stout and hard with athletic exercises, having by personal strength and valour purchased the king- dom, reviver of many thousand donations and sacrifices for long-ceased festivals of the gods and brahman endowments, performer of the offering of first-fruits  agrayana , remover of the fear of others, his two arm? shining with ge ns of hard knobs produced by drawing his bow, his race glorified by his great and wide-spresd fame as the waterlilies by the rays o? the moon, was erimat madhava-mahadhirajah.  the beloved sisters son of 'sn-kri3hnavarmma-mahadhiraja, -who, anointed with the final ablutions of the completed inrse-'sacniici, w is the sun to the firmament of the auspicious kadamba- kula,—having obtained the anointing to the kingdom on the couch of the lap of his divine mother, enjoying to the full the essence of the three objects of desire without one interfering with the other, his mind illumined with the increase of learning and modesty, of a wide-spread fame gained by victory in many wars which made the three worlds appear as one milk ocean, a lake to the lotus of compassion for the bees the eyes of fur women disturbed by the shower of the arrows of the god of love, reckoned the chief among poets, the ablest among the most able, was srimat kongani- mahadhirajah.  by his son, successor to the qualities of his father, his broad chest embraced by the arms of one who desired him though assigned by her father to the son of another, surrounded by  28  bangalore taluq  feudatories subjected by the exercise of the three powers of increase, surrounded by ministers attached to him by constant affection and gifts, having with the sharp sword in his hand cut down and with his arms uprooted the hosts of his enemies, of a form glorious with virtue and set with the gams of the daily improving qualities of the best of men, though not matured in age yet possessed of ripe virtue, amine of the clusters of many distinguished qualities, in punishing according to desert the equal of vaivasvata, having sufficient agents for protecting the castes and religious orders in the south, having good subjects, of supreme righteousness, meditating  on the feet of the divine kamalodara  vishnu ,—what more?—by the yuddhishtira of the kali age by srimad a ongani-maharaj a—«in the third year of the great wealth increased by himself, in the month s'ravana, on new moon day,—-to the maintainer of the sacred fire, dwelling in mahasenapura,  vasasarmma .... {rest illegible .  5th plate missing.  
 142  date? 1105 α.όλ   nagari characters .  obeisance to s'ambhu, adorned with the points of the rays of the moon, the.. ,. tree of plenty  be it well. when, the refuge of all the world, favourite of earth and fortune, the maharaja- dhiraja paramesvara parama-bhattaraka, boon lord of kalyana-pura, bestower of widowhood on the wives of the hostile elephant-riding bhagadatta kings, a sun to the lotus the chalukya-kula fierce in war, a bow to kalinga, a sun among champions, self-sustained hero, bold in the field of battle, displacer of aavapati-raya, destroyer of gajapati-raya, smiter on the head of narapati-raya tanner of the deer the feudatories, the daily terror of the four quarters of konkaua, a son to the wives of others, having a flag with the crest of a golden boar, adorned with the glory of all lines of kings, born in the soma-vamsa  or lunar race , sri-vira-nonamba-chakravartti was in kalyana - pura, ruling the kingdom in peace and wisdom :—on making a victorious expedition to the south from the henjara village, jcatakam utulitam, in the s'aka year 366, the year tarana, in the dark fortnight of the month phalguna, on thursday, at the time of new moon,—  the principal gangavadikara, the vadda-byavahari of the chalukyas, maro-satti, of thehalahadi village, in the kunda-nad seventy district of the gangavadi ninety-six thousand, having in the henjara battle pierced the horse and brought down the honour of kilva-raya,-^there were given  to him  the five-fold gifts,—umbrella, palanqnin, escort, throne, and land with fines and excise- given with the eight rights of fall possession, and with all ceremony.  details of the land, and boundaries s witnesses.  written by the highly accomplished odvachari.  whoso seizes upon a span-breadth of land, or so much as a fingers breadth, shall linger in hell till the deluge,  *vl?am°™u, ari-raya-mastaua-tala-pramri  smiter on the heads of hostile kings .  the professed date is 445 or 45 a.d. s'aka 366 expired   pramathi.-tarana   s'aka 372. 