BANGALORE TALUQ.

1

Date 1628 Δ.Ό.

(Telugu)— Be it well. (On the date speciiied), when the râjâdhirâja râja-paramêâvara vîra-
pratâpa vîra-Râma-Dêva-mahâràya, seated on the jewel throne, was ruling the empire of the
world :—when, of the Asannava-kula, the Yalahanka-nad prabhu Kempanâchaya-Gauni's grandson,
Kempe-Gauni's son, Immadi-Kempt-Gaunayya was îuiing a peacefal kingdom in righteousness ;—-all
the people of Bengalûr pête entered into the folio win g agreement ;—

Be it well. Obtainers of all favours from their own Mahânkâlikâ, worshippers of the lotus feet
of (the gods) Ganêsvara Gaurîâvara and Vîra-Nârâyana, chief men in Ayyâvaje, all the Sâlumûla of
both Nânâ Dêsis of this country and other countries, and all the Sâlumûla of both (sects of) the
Nânà Dêsis of Pekkonda Penugonda Bengalûru Gûjûru Chikkanâyinipalle ... Ballâpuram Kâtiparti
Ava.. Chandragiri Kôlâla Kottakôta Kâvêripatna Râyakôta Narasîpuram Bêlûru Hebbûru Nâga-
mangalam Ikkêri Bastipalli and other places,—for the offerings, festivals and other ceremonies of the
god Ranganâtha of Mutyâlapête in Bengalûru,—made application to Kempe-Gauni, and granted
certain dues (specified)

Usual imprecatory verses. Signatures.
****
2

Date 1633 A.D.

(Telugu)—.. ·· in order that dharma might be to the Yalahanka-nâd prabhu, Immadi-Kempaya-
Gauni, and his eons and grandsons in succession, as loug as sun and moon endure,—Gujjari Visva-
nàtha had the dharmaêâla matlia built (in tha year specified).
****
3

Date 1855 A.D.

Be it we'll. (On the date specified), the disciple of Siddhagiri-Gôsâvi of Sômavftra-pête in the
Punaha-shaharu-kaeabe (Poona city), Vijayagiri-Gôsâvi's disciple, Bhagavantagiri-Gôsâvi,—the
hliata mânya field (specified), with house, threshing-floor, and manure pit, belonging to Dharmâ-
dikshita, to the east of the Tâvarekere village in the Bêgûr tâlûk attached to Bengalûru, which I
have bought from Dharmâ-dîkshita's grandson Shâm-bhata for Company Rupees 400,—I have grant-
ed, for the love of the god, for the offerings, illuminations, priest and servants of the god Manchi-
Sômêâvara in the Aralêpête of Bengalûru. Imprecations,

Whoso maintains this with good will, his feet be on my head.

Bangalore Taluq
****
4

Date 1830 A.D.

(Telugu)—Obeisance to Vishnu,1 his lofty head kissed by the châraara-like crescent moon, the
foundation, pillar for the city of the three worlds. May the tush of the Eoar, the sportive form of
Hari (Vishnu), protect us, supported on which the Earth shone, with the snowy mountain as a
canopy.

Be it weli. (On the date specified), when the râiâdhirâja râja-mârtânda, ràja-têjô-nidhi, râja.
kanthîrava, praudha-pratâpa, Krishua-Râja-sârvvabhauma, was ruling the empire of the world,
seated on the iewel throne in the midst of the two Kàvêris :—

For the offerings, illuminations and festivals of our family god Venkatêsvara Sugrîva,—we, all
those of the 39 gôtras of Vira-Kehatriyas of the Mêlu-S'arkaru-vamsa in this place and in other
places, have, of our own will, caused to be written and given a dâna s'âsana as follows ;—those in
Bengalûru, agree to give for each family per annum 1 rûka, at Goknlashtami \, at Navarâtri i, and
for each marriage 3 : those in other places, agree to give 1 rûka per family per annum, and for each
marriage |. To be continued as long as sun, moon, mountains, earth, sky and the seven oceans
endure,—by us, our sons and posterity. Imprecations. Signatures.
****
5

Date 1858 A.D.

(Ttlugu)--Date. The tomb of Mânâpati Venkataramanappa-Nàyini of Kalyânadurga in the
Râyadurga-samsthâna, who attained to the feet of Virûpa ou the date (specified).
****
6

Date 1253 A.D.

{Nâgart characters).
On the seal are a tiger in relief, and the saläka or rod, with sun and moon above

May he protect us, the original Boar, on whose tush the shadow of the mountain-like Earth
made her appear as if for joy she had grown double. Display, Ο tongue, thy courage,— I beseech
thee with folded hands,—in publishing the praises of the kings of the Lunar race ; albeit the utter-
ance of the victorious deeds of kings is so pleasing to thee, why should I implore thee ?

From the lake the navel of the divine creator of all, the protector of the three worlds,—which
contains all 'he world,—Vishnu, sprang a lotus ; at which S'rî, who was born from the lotus
as her home, rejoiced that she would now ever without separation enjoy union with her beloved.
From that lotus was "born the divine Vidhi (Brahma), an ocean for the play of the waves the sayings
of the sruti (or vêdas), a householder whose household duties were performed by the ever graceful
Bhâratî, creator of the world with its revealed and hidden things, its past present and future, its
half-formed and not-yet-formed life. From his mind was born the sage (hamsa) Atri, of pleasing
character, dwelling in appoinied forests, ever pure of mind. From his eye issued a stream of mercy
like the river of heaven, as if the foam of which was born, giving joy to all piople, the solid Chandra
(the moon), the drops of shining nectar shed by whom heal the wounds that women receive from the
nails of their lovers when embracing them. From him as the beginning sprar.g a supreme race of
kings, the fire of whose valour withered up the bloom of the fame of their enemies. In it were born
ladu and many kings named in the purânas, who by their valour subdued the world, able in giving
Bangalore Taluq

joy to kings dependent on them, devoted to learning, maintaning their thrones by the continual
performance of sacrifices and festivals.

Among many such kings who thus in turn bore the burden of kingdom, was the mighty king
named Sala. Once on a time, that king going into the woo J s near to S'aSapura in order to worship
his family goddess named Vâsantî, saw there a holy muni and sat down by him for a moment in
peace- While unarmed, intent on worship oi the goddess and reverence of the muni, the noise of
wild beasts suddenly arose in the forest. After them a tiger appeared from somewhere, his claws
such as to split through mountains, with an immense tongue issuing from the cave of his wide-open
mouth, sparks flying from his eyes which looked up, while his tail was raised on high, and his roar
filled all the points of the compass. In the language of his own country that muni exclaiming hoy
Sala (strike, Sala !), he at once slew it with the s'alaka (or rod) which he gave him. Whence all the
kings of that line were called Hoysajas, while the tiger, going to svarga, as if from desire to con-
stantly witness their fighting, became fixed on their flag, by the wind from the feathers of the arrows
discharged by whom their enemies were shaken. Then wasrborn the king Vinayâditya, the bright-
ness of whose fame illuminated even the abodes formed of creepers within the caves of mount Mêru,
delighting in the game of putting down the pride of hostile kings, able in inventing many new modes
of works of piety. From him was the king Ereyanga, who placed his feet in order like a crown on
the heads of kings, who by the smoke of the burning cities in which his trained horses had trampled
to death all his enemies brought tears into the eyes of the groups of gods who had assembled for
sport. Vishnu was his son, whose footstool was tinted from the radiance of the jewels in the crowns
of prostrate kings. The black smoke of the sacrifices offered in the villages given away by whom
heightened the whiteness of his fame. The clouds of dust, raised by his prancing horsemen rose like
smoke and blinded the eyes of the goddesses in the sky ; but afterwards the waving of the flags on
the temples he had erected blew it away.

His son was the king Nàrasimha, who, overcoming the valour of hostile kings, consigned them
to abodes in the caves of the mountains. In enjoying the sport of setting up pillars of victory
relating to his numerous conquests his arm was like a pleasure-loving serpent.

His son, whose feet were served by the wives of hostile kings, was the king BaMaJa, who
deprived all his enemies of their wealth. For the pleasure of serving him and dwelling in his city,
many hostile kings collected together the funds they had reserved for time of calamity. The wind
from the breath of the nostrils of his prancing horses caused the enemies to shake ; while in the fire
of his anger the lin* s of his enemies' ιities were burnt down. The flashing of the sword in his arm
brought death into the faces of his enemies, and on his merely lifting his bow the hostile kings fell
down in obeisance before him. His queen was the beautiful Padmalâ, the hands of all kings folded to
her in homage. His lame in whiteness was sister to fresh jtismin, sandal, nectar, Kailâsa, the
moon, moonlight, the swan, a pearl, or the Ganges.

To those two was born the son Nàrasimha, with the signs of pleasure to all the world, like the
moon on the shore of the milk ocean. And from them was born as Lakshmî, praised by all people,
trusted by all kings, the famous Sômalâ, adorned with the garland of good qualities. When the
earth was supported in the arms of that king, S'êsha went about his own business of twining round
the top-knot of Dhûrjati (S'iva) ; and the eight mountains at the points of the compass, hearing the
songs of his praise sung by the Gandharvas, echoed back the songs. When, his mind immersed in
the desire for war, this king Nàrasimha came forth to battle, what kings could stand before him ? On an
•expedition of victory, the points of the rods which bore the banners that preceded him were as flames
the sight of which was sufficient to plunge the wives of his enemies into widowhood. On his goingBangalore Taluq

forth to war in the autumn, the vvive3 of the hostile kinga and their retinue were so filled with (ear
that the tears streaming from their eyes produced the rains of that season. That the king of the
serpents supporte;! on his soft head the heavy earth pressed down by the tramp of this king Nara-
simha's troops was no wonder, for the smoke of the burning cities of his enemies buoyed it up.
Vikramapâla, Pâmsa, Makara, and the fierce Hoysàryama, became as animals which he offered up
ία sacrifice, his enveloping arrows being the darbhe grass spread round it, the battle-field his sacri-
ficial hall, his anger the fig wood for kindling fire by rubbing, the hosts of his enemies the fuel, his
glory the fire, his words of threatening the mantras, the result (or reward) of it the setting up of
Chôla.

His son was the king Sôi-Dêva whose birth so far from being a festival of rejoicing to his ene-
mies was an omen of death. At the birth of that lord all the evil doers were filled with sorrow, while
the g >od were filled with joy and all the points of the compass exulted, all troubles were removed,
arid sins were driven afar. Mighty was Sôi-Dêva, whose feet were surrounded with the heads
of prostrate kings. At his coronation-anointing the sounds of the trumpets went beyond the mountains
at the points of the compass. Brilliant is the river in flood of his fame, which laid the dust raised
by his enemies, put out the flames of their glory, .... Indra and Upêndra, purified the breasts of
his enemies' wives (by washing off all ornamental marks, on their becoming widows), dragged off the
clustres of buds the crowns of hostile kings, and bore away the troubles of the world. The
movements of bis horse and foot over the batttle-field raised a dust which obscured the sun, but
the streams of blood flowing from his enemies was as oil feeding the fires which lighted it up. Was
it the wind caused by his waving banners when he went forth to war that raised the waves of the
sea ? rather was it the plunging into the waters of the armies of his enemies smitten by the strokes of
his sword,

In the pure ocean the Bhâradvâja-kula, born in the Sôma-vamsa (or Lunar race), was the king
Chiddarasa, chief among the virtuous and among those who bear arms. His fame, white as jasmin,
the moon, or ivory, was daily worn as an earring by the wives of the gods. His clever wife was the
famous Vudanàchi, seeing whose wealth Kubêra fled with shame to the ends of the world. From her
was born a daughter named Sômalâ, a collection of the essence of all gems, of slender waist, in
beauty surpassing Rati, her hand adorned with a lotus, like Lakshmi in removing the troubles of
the needy. To the king Soma she became the crowned queen, and by her gifts put to shame the
tree of plenty. With firm faith in the feet of Chandrâvatamsa (S'iva), that wife named Sômalâ,
along with the fame of king Soma, ascended to heaven, and with it took up her long abode.*

He, adorned with all titles, of pure character, the king Sômêsvaia, dwelling in the great capital
named ViUramapura, which he had created for his pleasure in the Chôla-mandala that he had
conquered by the might of his own arm, (on the date specified), at the time of the eclipse of the sun,
in consequence of a discourse on the many gifts proper to be made on that day,— for the final happi-
ness of his crowned queen Sômalâ-Dêvî,—giving to Madanapalli along with Mattikatta, situated in
the Kalukuni-nâd-vîshaya,—-the rent of which was 140 nishkas,—another name of Sômalâpura,
formed it into 70 shares, and made a grant of them to Brâhnnns of many gôtras and to gods, with
pouring of water.

The grant repeated in Kannada, with numerous details of the rents payable. He thus gave to
the Brâhmans 62 shares, 1 for the Rig-vêda khandika, 1 1er the Yajur-vêda khandika, I for the
Sâma-vêda khandika, 1 for bhatta-vritti, 2 for the god he had set up in the town. 2 for the tank,—
altogether 70 shares, the annual rent of which, payable to the palace, was ga 140.

From Ulis it would appear that she now died.

Bangalore Taluq

5

For many yugas and kalpas, as long as the sun's chariot goes forth, as long as the sea rolls
with waves, as long as rivers male and female flow, as long as the sun shines and the earth stands
n'rm, as long as the sky with its constellations lasts, as long as Sêtu and Mêru continue,—so long may
this gift of the king Sômêsvara endure. Other usual final verses.

(signed)-— srî-Vîra-Sômêsvaraeya.
****
6α

Date 1297 Α.Ό.

(Tamil)—I, Kôil-ip daliyâr, the greatpasâyitta of the S'àndilja gôtra, gave (on the date speci-
fied) to the mahâjanas of Irumbiliûr, alias Vîra-vallâja-chchatuivêdi-mangalam, the villages of
S'ayanallây and Koppipalli, included in the district of Tommalûr in Ilaippâkka-nâdu, (excluding the

lands formerly granted) as tiriividaiyâttam, hatta-vritti, pallichchandam, madappuram.........

situated within the four boundaries of those villages.............(Usual final imprecatory sent-.

ence). May there be prosperity. Râmabhadra a?ain and again entreats all iuture kings that they
should from time to time protect this bridge of virtue, which is common to all kings.
****
7

Daté 1791 A.D.

(Persian)—As soon as the foundation of this palace was laid, its head was raised to heaven
with joy. Oh, what a lofty mansion, a home of happiness, its summit being above the skies. It is a
house of glass in purity, all who see it are struck with wonder. In magnificence it rivals the sky,
which hangs down its head with shame. The description alone of this palace, when heard by
Taridûn,1 caused him to go to his long sleep. I sought by computation according to Zar2 for the
date, and an unseen angel said—"A house of happiness,'' 1196 (1781 A.D.). When the painting
of this new palace was finished, it cast the beauty of China into oblivion. I sought for this date
from Khizir3 the wise, who said—"Doubtless it is envied by heaven," 1206(1791 A.D.)
****
8

Date 1440 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), in order that the râjâdhirâja râja-paramêsvara vîra-Dêva-
Râya-maharâya might be seated on the (jewel) throne,—Mallarasa, the adhikâri of Hejjunka in the
Sondeyakoppa-vênte, sent by Ràyauna of Pattana, gave to the god Chokkanâtha of Dombalûr a grant
as follows Whereas formerly whatever customs-officers came to Sondeyakoppa-vênte made a gift
of their share of the hejjmhn levied from those who came to any of the villages within the four
boundaries (of the land) belonging to the god Chokkanâtha of Dombalûr,—in order that the former
custom may continue as long as sun and moon, and that all empire may he to our Ràyanna-
Odeyar,—we grant our respective shares as a gift to provide the offering at dawn of the god
Chokkanâtha, to continue as long as sun and moon. Imprecations.

ι ...
An ancient model king of Persia, noted for Iiis justice and generosity.

  system invented by Tîpu Sultan, calculating by ahtas instead of the ordinary abjad, the Arab notation in common use
among Muhammadans. CSee Mysore Gazetteer, revised edition of 1397, Vol. I, Appendix, p. 812).

A. prophet who was minister to a king of Persia. He disoorered and drank of the fountain of life and became immortal.
By some he is confounded with the prophet Elias, and likewise with St. George of England, whom they call Khizir Elias.

Bangalore Taluq
****
9

Date ? about 1270 A.D.

(Tatnil)—»I, Alagiyâr, made......in the name of .. ... .. in the temple of S'okkapperuraâl

These two door-posts are his charity.
****
10

Date ? 1266 A.D.1

(Tamil)—(On the date specified), I, Tàlaikkâffu Iravi Tripurântaka-settiyâr of Tombalûr, alias
Têéimânikka-pattinam in Ilaippâkka-nâdu of Râjêndra-S ôTa-vala-nâdu—along with (my wife) Pârpati-
éettichchiyâr, granted, as tax-free temple property, for the god Tripuràntaka-pperumâl, set up by
myself,—so that he might be worshipped to save from re-birth Nambi Iravi-settiyâr, (his wife)
S'rîdêviyakka and their descendants, and for victory to the arm and sword of Tribhuvanama'la
Vembi-deva and his descendants, —the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries in the village of
Jâlappalli, the tank at Vinuamangalam and certain other lands (specified) below the big tank of
Tombalûr, and made them over, along with some other lands (specified), to the holder of the temple
land, Irâma-pirân Allâla-nambiyâr, for conducting the worship. I also gave over, with pouring of
water, the charge of this temple to Talai S'ankarappâchâriyan Tillainâyagan's nephew Manali
Tripurântaka-pperumâl-àchâriyan, granted him the right of officiating at consecration, and gave him,
for meeting the expenses of repairs to the temple, certain lands (specified) to descend to his sons and
grandsons for as long as the moon and the sun exist. Further, I granted certain lands (speci-
fied in each case) to the hold >r of the tomple land, Kaduvanudaiyân S'ûriyan S'ambandar, to the
temple servants and to S'okka-pper ma' Mânikkam..............................................

(Those who violate this charity) shall incur the sin of having slaughtered tawny cows and Brâh-
mans on the b inks (of the <Ganges), and shall be born worms in crdure for as long as the rocks, the
Kaveri, the grass and t le earth endure, and the Brahma-kalpa lasts.

I, Allâja-nambiyar, made a gift of one-third of my land in Tombalûr to S'avari-pperumâl-nam-
biyâr.
****
11

Date 1290 A.D.

(Tamil)—In the 36th year of the reign of Poysaja vîra-ïtâmanâda-Dêvar—

On a petition being ma'e by the inhabitants of Ilaippâkka-nâdu, the officer S'ella-ppiljai, the
temple-manager Ν ; u&igal Nârâyana-tàdar and some others (named), to the effect that the provision
made for the expens >s of festivals of the god S'okkapperumaJ of Tombalûr is inadequate, the king
remitted (on the date specified) 10 pon out of the amount that was being paid by (the village of)
Tombalûr. Usual final imprecatory sentence.
****
12

Date ? about 1300 A.D.
(Tamil)—(This inscriptio ι is mostly gone).

This is the rtaivri-s'âwna................................of the followers of different

callings. This edi t of the carpe*»t<rs is the ornament of the three worlds.......................

The following is thf permanent agreement made by all the Panchâlas who had assembled, with-
out a vacancy in the assembly, 'n fro-it of the god S'okkapperumAJ :—In the nâdus.........


Tbe S'ak-» yea · corresponding to Kshaya 13 given as 1180. But Kshaya** U89.

Bangalore Taluq γ
****
13

Date? about 1200 A.D.

(Tamil)—According to the stipulation made by Tripuràntaka-pperumâJ Embe-dêvar of Tombalûr
alias Têâimânikka-pattanam, of Ilaippâkka-uâdu in Iràjarâja-Sôla-vala-nâdu, five panams (are
sanctioned) for lamps for two months.
****
14

Date 1821 A.D.

(Tamil)--This is the sacred marriage hall built (on the date specified) by Tirukkanam Ayyâ-
mudeliyâr's son Vêdagiri-niudeljyâr for the god £rî-Subbarâya-suvamiyâr of Aîasûr, (The same
repeated in Telugu).
****
15

Date 1876 A.D.

(Tamil)—(On the date specified), the pensioner S'aràngu S'aduppêri S'abâpati-niudeliyâr made
a gift of this house for the festval in Knrttigai of the god érî-S'ômêsvara-iuvâmi who has been
pleased to reside in Araia-ma-nagaram.
****
16

Date 1410 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date speciiied), at the time when the râjàdhirâja râja-paramêâvara vîra-
Dêva-Râya-OJeyar was ruling the whole empire :—Boimnanna-Öetti's son MAchirûsa-Setti had this
dîpamâîe pillar made.
****
18

Date ? 1303 A.D.
(Tarnil)—(This inscription is moetly gone).

While the (mahâ) mandalêsvara, (Tribhu)vanamalla..... .. ...............(on the date

specified) set up this stone............
****
19

Date 1524 A.D.

May it be prosperous. (In the year specified), in the time of Krishna-Râya,—Singapa-Nâyaka
granted for the offerings to the god in Singapurs, the Chiga Bettahalji (village), to Hiriaya Varadar
rajaya, son of Timmanayya of Pattana, of the Râmânuja-kûta.
****
21

Date 1342 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when the pratâpa-chakravartti Hoysaja vîra-Ballâia-Dêva-
rasa was in Unnâmale-pattana, ruling the kingdom of the world :«—all the subjects and farmers of
Elahaka-nâd, and the mahâ-sâvantadhipati, champion over mustaches, Chikka-Bayiraya-Nâyaka's
son Honnamâraya-Nàyaka, granted to the nâd-sênabhôva Alâja, land (specified) at Jekkûr in this
nâd, as a sarvvamânya Jcodagi, to continue as long as the sun and moon.
****
23

Date 1305 A.D.

(Tamil)—While Pôsala vîra-Vallâla-Dêvar was pleased to rule the earth—
(On the date specified) I, Chakravatti-dcnnâyakkar, son of Perumâl-dêva-dennâyakkar
granted, with pouring of water, exempt from all imposts, tho wet and dry lands, including ponds,

Bangalore Taluq

tanks and all other kinds of land, and excluding former gifts, within the four boundaries of S'ivapura,
situated in . .. palli, alias Ganga-Nàrâyana-chaturvêdi-mangalaun,—a village ? granted to me with
pouring of water, as a sarva-mânya, by the inhabitants of Ilaippàkka-nâdu,—to Ganga-Nàrâyaua-
pperumâl, Periya Kondabhatta and others. (Usual final imprecatory sentence)

{signed, in Kannada) — Alâlanâtha .
****
24

Date 3 342 AD.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when the praïâpa-chakravartti Hoysana vîra-Ballâla-
Dêvarasa was in the city of Unnâmale, ruling a peaceful kingdom :—the mahà-pasâyita, champion
oyer mustaches, Chikka-Bayireya-Nâyaka's brother-in-law Chôleya-Nayaka, the great Yelahaka-nâd
prabhu Bayire-Dêra and others (named), granted to the mahà-sâvantàdhipati Pemma-Dêvarasa's
son Allayya, lands (specifiad), as a sarvvamânya hodage.
****
25

Paie? about 1140 A.D.

(The upper part is gone\

......fighting with Hoysala-Dèva's dandanâyaka Udeyamayya in Kidambur,—Heggade Mâcha-

gonda's son Mâchi-dêva pierced many and died.
****
26

Date ? about 1430 A.D.

... .When the mahâ-mandalêsvara Praudha-Râya was ruling the Kukkala-nâ^ ruler
Bukka-Nâyaka granted Bommahalli in that nâd, free of all imposts, for an agrahâra, remitting
the customs one way. Imprecation.
****
27

Date 1368 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when the :nahâ-mandalêsvara, subduer of hostile kings,
champion OTer kings who break their word, master of the four oceans, Bukkanna ...{rest effaced).
****
28

Date 1530 A.D.

t 1

Be it well. (On the date specified),—in order that merit might be to Achyuta-Râya-mahârâya
and to our father Basxvappa-Nàyaka,—Hàrôhalli, belonging to the Sivanasamudra-sthala, which
Achyuta»Râya favoured to Sôlûr Basavappa-Nayaka's son Krishnappa-NAyaka for his office of Nâyaka,
have we granted for the decorations, illuminations and offerings of the god Tiruvengalanâtha of
Singâpura, to be held by the Râmànuja-kûta.
****
29

Date 1349 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), ' Anneya-Nâyaka's son .. be-Nâyaka ... slew and fell.
Apparently repeated.
Bangalore Taluq 9
****
30

Date 1544 A.D.

Beit well. (On the date specified), when the raahàrâjâdhirâja râja-paratnêsvara vîra-pratâpa
vîra-Sadâeiva-Râya was ruling the kingdom of the world : -—the mahâ-maudalêsvara, the Marâta
Vifchalêsvara-Dèya-mahà-arasu's agent Ràchùr Narasimhaya granted, for the offerings of the god
Allâlanâtha of Jakkur, the Allâlasandra village in the Sivanasamudra-âîme of Elahaka-nâd, with
all rights (specified),—in order that merit might be to Vithalêsvara-arasu.
****
31

Date 1340 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when the pratâpa-chakravarttî Hoysala vîra-Ballàla-Dêv-
araea was in Unnâmale-pattana, ruling the kingdom of the world the great minister Kâmeya-
dandanâyaka's son Kâmeya-dannâyaka granted to the nâd-senabhôva Allâja the lands according to
former custom belonging to the fort of Hàramaravûr, as a sarvamânya kodage.
****
32

Date about 1080 A.D.

Be it well. When Kulôttunga-Chôla, the Saune-nâd ruler Kàdeya-Nàyaka's warrior,
Mummadi-Setti's sonGuliyana's younger brother, Râma-dêva went forth for hunting, and in the hun t
let fly (an arrow) at an old boar, he was wounded and killed. (Apparently a grant was made for
him).
****
34

Date 1342 A.D.

t

Be it well. (On the date specified), wheu the refuge of the three worlds, [favourite of earth
and fortune], mahâràjâdhiràja râja-paramêâvara, sun in the sky the Yâdava-kuîa, crest-jewel ο f

omniscience,......the pratâpa-chakravartti Hoysaja vîra-Ballâla........was ruling......:—

a grant in Elahaka-nâd (details effaced)
****
36

Date about 750 A.D.

Be it well. When S'rîpuruslia-mahâràja was ruling the kingdom of the earth called
Polettâlvor, Kukkara who was ruling Bidirkkal in Karika-nâd, drore out the Pâlikkâri-nâd
people, and smiting the whole force of foot-soldiers, fell.

Ambi-âchâri's son Nâga made this.
****
37

Date ? about 980 A.D.

Be it well. When Indara was ruling,—Dharmrnagudu, piercing ..........went to svargga.

A grant was made for bim. Imprecation.
****
r 38

Date about 1000 A.D.

»

Be it well. Mâdi-gâmunda being......this Periyûr,—Siriyûra's son Màrasinga, when the cows

of Inbatur were carried off, died. When Chaûra was ruling he died.

3
Bangalore Tftluq
****
39«

Date ? about 1250 A.D.
(Tamil;—(The first part of this inscription is gone).

I granted, as a charitable gift in connection with a érâddha, all the wet and dry lands within

the four boundaries (given in detail) of.................., including the trees orerground and the wells

underground, and all the profits, to eleven Brâhmans of various gôtras. (Usual final imprecatory
sentence). May there be prosperity.
****
40

DaU about 820 A.D.

Be it well. When Permmânadi was ruling the kingdom of the earth :—and Nojamba S'iva-
mâra was ruling Morasu-nâd ;—of the Mahabali-vamsa, Nijapa's son Anniga received from both
kings a âêvabhôga, and for the increase of ... caused to be given 2 kandugas of land to Trailôka-
vîra.

Ereyappa and the Brahmans of Mangala are witnesses.
Kailâsa-pandita wrote it. Imprecation.
To the Nâyaka 5 ploughs of land.
****
41

DaU 1343 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when the pratâpa-chakravartti Hoysaja vîra-Ballâla-
Dêvarasa was in Unnâmale-pattana, ruling a peaceful kingdom ;—the mahâ-sâvantâdhipati Chikka-
Kajaya-Nâyaka, and all the farmers of Kâdagôdi-sthala in the tract within the stream on the south
side of the great Sanue-nâd, granted to the sênabhôva of this Sanne kingdom, Perumbâchari's (sob)
Sâtuvêla Alàja, a stone sâsana as follows ;—all the wet and dry land according to former custom
included within the four boundaries of Hattandur in this sthala, have we granted as a sarvvamânya
Tsodige, for as long as sun and moon endure, making the grant with a stone âasana.

Great good fortune.
****
42

Date about 820 A.D.

Be it well. For the setting up of ? S'iva Bhîma, the Ninety-two granted land (specified). Im-
precation.

When Râ amalla-Permmânafli was ruling the kingdom was this erected.
****
43

Daté 1383 A.D.
(Tamil)—In the t9th year of the reign of Irâmanâ-Dêyar—

(On the date specified), Irâjaraja-Karkata-mârâyar Ganga-pperumâl made a grant of land.
****
44

DaU 1334 A.D.

(Tamil)—During the rule over the earth of nièsanka-pratâpa Pôsala vîra-Vallâla-Dêvar—
The mahà-vîra-§âmantâdipati Lakuma-Nâyakka's son Kallaya-Nâyakka and Vaichcba-gâmunda
ai d ctber inl alitants (two more named) of Turaivali-nâdu, granted (on the date specified), for as
Bangalore Taluq n

long as the moon and the sun endure, the Tillages of Pammasamudra and Pammakirai as a
htdangai, to ...... mâra-kkavunda's son S'okkanna and S'elvândai. (Then follow boundaries of the

Tillages).
****
47

Datei 1346 Α.ΏΛ

(Tamil)—While the mahâ-mandalîéura Hariyappa-udaiyar was pleased to rule the earth-
en the date specified), .....Vallapa .. .. unàyakkar, the mahâ-jana of Irumbiliyftr and the

inhabitants (a few named) of Veyûr-nâdu granted to S'evida-pergadaiyàr,as a sarva-mânya, the wet
and dry lands within the four boundaries of Udaiyaupalli, including the trees overground and the
wells underground, and the taxes pûrvâya and apûrvâya.
****
50

Daté 1451 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), at the time of an eclipse,—the mahârâjâdhirâja râja-para-
mêsvara, master of the ... southern and western oceans, Dêva-Râya-mahârâya's son (rest effaced).
****
51

Date 3301 A.D.*

(Tamil)—-The pratâpa-chakravatti srî-HoysaJa-vîra-Vallâla-Dêvar intimates the following to the
"heads of mathas and sthânikas in the temples situated in the Hesar-Kundâni-kingdom, Virivi-nâdu,
Mâsandi-nâdu, Muraâa-nâdu, S'okkanâyan-parru, Peunaiyândârmada-nâdu, Aimbulugûr-nâdu,
Elavûr-nâdu, Kuvajâla-nâdu, Kaivâra-nâdu, Ilaippâkka-nâdu, and all other nâdus :—

(On the date specified), we have remitted all kinds of taxes, including the tax on looms, the
tax on goldsmiths, tribute and tolls, hitherto paid in the gifts to temples, etc.—dêva-dânam, tiruvi-
daiyâttam, madappuram—of our kingdom and granted the same, with pouring of water, for certain
gods, to provide for worship, offerings of rice, enjoyments and temple repairs.

Accordingly, be pleased to take possession of the villages S'ûrikkuttai, S'ingaman-kuttai,
Kôva-âamuttiram and others which are the tax-free temple property of the god S'ômanâtha-dêvar
of Kunjiyûr, make adequate provision for worship, offerings of rice, enjoyments and temple repairs,
and live happily, praying for the prosperity of oursolves and our kingdom.
****
52

Date 1508 AD

(Telugu)—Be it well. (On the date specified), when the mahâ-rnandalêsrara râjâdhirâja râya-
paramêsvara......vîra-pratâpa vîra-Narasinga-Râya-mahârâya [was ruling] .........

Imprecations.
****
53

Date 1304 A.D.*

(Tamil)—For victory to the sword and arm of the refuge of the whole world, favourite of earth
and fortune, mahârâjâdhirâja paramêévara, lord of the excellent city of Dvârâvati, sun in the sky of

The S'aka year given is 1209 corresponding to Vyaya. As Hariyappa is mentioned as the king, 12C9 m»y be a mistake for 1269.
2

The Kali year given as correiponding to the S'aka year 1224 is 3311. But it ought to be 4403.
The corresponding Kali year is gireii te 3649 which ought to be 440

Bangalore Taluq

the Yâdava family, creit-jewel of the all-knowing, king of the hill kings, champion over the hill chiefs,
terrible to warriors, fierce in war, sole warrior, unassisted hero, S'imivâra-siddhi, Griridurga-mftlla
a Rama in firmness of character, a lion to the elephants his enemies, uprooter of the Makara
kingdom, establisher of the Chôja kingdom, raiser up of the Pândya family, the fearless pratâpa-
chakravatti, Hôeaîa-srî-vîra-Biillàla-Dêvarasar—

The inhabitants of Periya-nâ<Ju in MâSandi-nâdu including Pilla-gâminda, the superintendent
of.. . Vîra-Vallà}a-dêva-nàdu, and the officers (some named) made the following grant for the
god S'ivagange-u<Jaiya-nayanar :—

While vîra-VallâJa-Dêvaraâar wai ruling the earth, punishing the wicked and protecting the
good, having taken his residence in Dôraâamuttira, after having led an expedition against the Ariyaa
in the north, destroyed the fort of Nâkkigundi and achieved victory—

(On the date »pecified), we, the inhabitants of the nâdu, granted, with pouring of water, to con-
tinue for as long as the moon and the sun endure, the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries,
including the trees overground and the wells underground, in the villages of Nerkundi and Eni-
niArkkadappalli of our nâdu, in order to provide for offerings of rice for the god S'ivageûgai-udaiyâr.

He who confiscates land, whether given by himself or by another, is born a worm in ordure
for sixty thousand years. (Usual final imprecatory sentence). This charity is under the protection
of Mâhêsvaras. May there be prosperity.
****
55

"Date about 750 A.D.

Wh^n S'rîpui-usha-mahârâja was ruling:—.............Màreya . . pierced and fell.
****
56

Date 1366 A.D.

(Telugu)—Be it well. (On the date specified), Nàgasâni,—the wife of Nârapa-Setti, son of the
great vadda-vt/avahari, Bava-Sstti of G-undapalli in .. vârika-nâd, acquainted with both ways (or
creeds),—in order that her husband and other (relatives) for twenty-one generations might obtain
merit,—had this tank constructed, to continue as long as sun and moon.
****
57

Dat$ 1532 A.D.

May it be prosperous. Be it well. (On the date specified), when (with usual titles) Achyuta-
Eâya-mahàrâya was ruling the kingdom of the world the Chokkanahajli village in the Sivana-
samudra-sîme belonging to the Elahaka kingdom favoured by Achyuta-Râya-mahârâya to Kempa-
Dêvarasa for his office of Nâyaka, have we granted for the Iraya temple of........
****
50

Date 1346 A.D.

(Tamil) —While the mahâ-mandalêsvaras, subduers of hostile kings, champions over kings
who break their word, srî-vîra-Ariyappa-udaiyar and Bukkana-udaiyar were ruling the earth—

Bangalore Taluq.

13

(Οα the date specified), we—the great pat(a-viyâpâri Muttiyaraâan Ilaman S'uvâsâ-nâyakkar
and the inhabitants of Tentarru-Turaivali-nadu in S'anai-na<Ju of Râjêndira-S'ô]la-vaîa-nâdu in
Nigarili-S'ôla-mandalam—granted, with pouring of water, certain lands (specified), together with
the right to sell or mortgage, to Gangâdhara .... of SaTaua-Kauâika-gôtra, a resident of S'enji-
agaram in ... chchi-ùr-nâdu of Tonda-mandalam. (Then follow boundaries of the lands granted)
****
60

Dai* 1337 A.D.

m

(famil)—During the time that the pratâpa-chakravatti Hôéala-vîra-Vallâla-Devar was pleased
to rule the earth—

(On the date specified), we, the inhabitants of Turaivali-nàdu and Vira-Vallâla-Dêva's son ...
ya-Nàyakka, granted, with pouring of water, to continue for as long as the moon and the sun
endure, the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries, including the trees overground and the

wells underground, in ..........·. ...of Turaivali-nàdu, to certain persons (named) at the rate of so

many shares (specified) each. We gave them (these lands) as a sarva-mânya. (Usual final impre-
catory sentence), May there be prosperity. Râmabhadra again and again entreats all future kings
that they should from time to time protect this bridge of virtue, which is common to all kings.
****
61

Date 1332 Ä.D,

Be it well. (On the date specified), by order of the mahà-maudalesvara the Hoysanêévara
vîra-Ballàla-Dêva Chôla-mahâràja-râja,—Beiaga Bemeya-Nâyaka and others (named) with all
the subjects and farmers, in order that Tolavandi Bommi-Sett^s son Bayire-Setti's younger brother
Mukuti-Setti as pattana-svami of Chika-Hûdi might establish a fair, granted him a kodagi of
land (specified), with dues, tolls and other payments (specified). Signatures.

llastana Jakana wrote it. The engraver of this sâsana was Engôja's son Bairôja.
****
63

Date 1332 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), by order of the mahâ-mandalêsvara vîra-Ballâla-Deva,—
various lands (specified) were granted as kodage to Be}aganchi Mayi-Nayaka's ...... Mâchi-garuda.
****
64

Date 1793 A.D.

(On the date specified), Atupâkam Annâmale-Mudaliyâr's lawful wife Venkatanima's dharma-
chhatra was enlarged by her eldest son Râya-Bahâdur Ratna-Sabhâpat'-Mudaliyâr in memory of his
senior uncle Venkatâchala-Mudaliyâr's lawful wife Mangatâyi-amma.
****
64'

Date 1793 A.D.

The same in Tamil.

4
 Bangalore Tahjq
****
65

Date 1301 A.D.

(Tamil)—The pratâpa-chakravatti sri-Hoysala-vîra-Vailâla-Dêva intimates the following to the
heads of mathas and sthânas in the temples situated in the Hesar-Kundâni-kingdom, Virivi-nâduj
Mâsandi-nâdu, Murasu-nâdu, S'okkanâyan-parru, Pennaiyândâr-mada-nâdu, Aimbujugur-nadu,
Elavûr-nâdu, Kuvalàla-nâdu, [Kaivâra-nâdu], Ilaippâkka-nâdu and all other nâdus :—

(On the date specified), we have remitted all kinds of taxes, including tribute, present, the
tax on looms, the tax on goldsmiths, and tolls, hitherto paid in the gifts to temples, etc—dêva-
âànam, tiruvidaiyâttam^ madappuram and pallichchandam—οΐ our kingdom and granted, with
pouring of water, certain ? vibhavas for certain gods, to provide for worship, offerings of rice,
enjoyments and temple repairs.

Accordingly, be pleased to take possession of the villages (four named) and separate pieces of
land, which are a dêva-dâna of the god S'embîàvaram-udaiya-nâyanàr of Tâmaraikkarai in
Veppûr-parru, make adequate provision for worship, offerings of rice, enjoyments and temple
repairs, and live happily, praying for [the prosperity of ourselves and our kingdom.]
****
66

Date 1366 A.D.

(Tamil)—The order of Tandisvara. In the sea-girt earth, the? ruler Kandîchchuran did
charity in former times. 1 will unhesitatingly place on my head the feet of him who protects the
charity of another.

(From the date specified), we—the mahâ-ganas, the heads of mathas and sthânas, the reciters
of the vedas, the temple manager (darma-hattar) S'embândai, the pûjâris Vaitti-battar, Mâdêva-
battar and their sons, Mâra-battar and his sons, the Kaikkôlar (? weavers^ of the fine temple at
? Kavarippinâ, the ? mûlachéhèdi sri-Vîrabattira and the servants performing various duties, from the
pûjân at the top to the scavenger at the bottom^-having assembled on the seat of justice, agreed
among ourselves to measure out a certain quantity (specified) of paddy and pay certain taxes
(named) to sri-Rudra-srî-Mahêévara of Chitramêli Perukkâlan-Dirukkâvanam residing in the temple
of S'ôma-îsvaram-udaiyâr of Tâmaraikkirai in the northern division of Veppur of Mââandi-nâdu iu
Kâjêndira-Sôla-vala-nâdu of Nigarili-Sôla-mandalam. ..................
****
67

Date 1365 A.D.

(Tamil)—During the time that the mahâ-mandalêsvara, subduer of hostile kings, champion
over kings who break their word, ârî-vîra-Bukkanna-udaiyar's [son Kempanna-udaiyar was ruling
the earth—

(On the date specified), érî-Rudra-éiî-Mahêsvara of Chitramêli Peruttâlan-Diruttâvanarn,1

the temple manager (danma-kattar) S'êmbândai-dêva's sone Tambana............ Painma-batta's

sons, S'onna-batta's sons and............, having assembled on the seat of justice in the temple of

S'embîsvaram-udaiyâr of Tâmaraikkarai ............ Veppûr-nâdu in Râjêndra-Sôla-vala-nâdu of

Nigarili-S'ôla-raandalam, gave the following grant to ......son S'ômanâ-dêvar of the Kaufcka-

gôtra:—

I, the tâna-pati Tambana-jîyar having received full payment in gold, gave, with pouring of

water, full possession of one-third of the lands (specified) which I had purchased from ........

eon Mudali, to S'ômanâ-dêvar. Witness—Hariyapparayar.

Perukkâlan-Dirukkâvaçam in the previous No.

Bangalore Taluq

15
****
68

Date 1247 A.D.

(Tamil)—(On the date specified), for the success of the arm and sword of............. I

S'embândai......of Tâmaraikkirai, granted certain lands (specified) to a certain number of persons

(named) at the rate of so many shares (specified) each for reciting the vêdas in the temple of
Sêyamîéuram-udaiya-nâyanàr. They shall enjoy these shares for as long as the moon and the sun
endure.

(Uiual final imprecatory sentence).

Pemmattaiyâr of Veppur granted some lands (specified) below the big tank of Vengajur for
the god S'embaâuram-udaiya-nâyanâr. I, Kûdal-amâttiya's son Amâttiyan, ? renewed the grant
of the above lauds for as long as the moon and the sun exist.

(Usual final imprecatory sentence).
****
69

Date ? about 1300 A.D.
(Tamil)-—To the god S'okkapperumâl of Tombalûr ....
****
70

...... Date ? about 1600 A.D.

At the feet of this (god) Basavêsvara the river called Vrishabhâvati rose, and flowed with its
stream to the west.
****
71

Date ? 1394 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when the mahâ-mandalêsvara vîra-lmmadi-Bukkanna's ..
.. son ... vîra .... was ruling the kingdom :—·. .. Nâyaka (rest illegible).
****
72

Date ? about 1350 A.D.

(Tamil)—We, Pamma-battar and S'embu-battar, having received full payment in gold, gave to
Pijlaiyar full possession of the land and the house which had been ours for a long time and trans-
ferred to him the service for fifteen days ......... in the temple of this god, which we had pur-
chased from Kujainja-battar.

The signatures of Pamma-battar and S'ernbu-bat$ar. Witnesses to the grant: Varadi-dêva-
kôn and S'okkannan.
****
73

Date 1381 A.D.

(Tamil)—While the destroyer of hostile kings, the mahâ-mandalêsvara srî-vîra-Hariyappa-udai-
yar was at S'annai Mujavâyil—

(On the date specified), I, ...... piramata .. .. , champion over traitors to their lords, made a

grant of lands (this portion is gone) for the god S'ivanêsvaram-udaiya-nâyanâr of Vêlûr in Turaivali-
nâdlu. (Usual final imprecatory sentence).
****
74

Date about 1300 A.D.

(Tamil)—This inscription gives merely the usual Hoysaja titles without mentioning any king,
and ends thus—We granted, with pouring of water.

16 Bangalore Taluq
****
75

Date 1301 A.D.

(Tamil)—(From the date specified), the inhabitants of Periya-nâdu in S'aruga-nâflu, the
superintendents of Vîra-Vallâla-dêva-nâ<Ju, S embi-dêvar and Villa-gâmundar, and several others
(named) seem to have made some grant. ^

Daté 1306 4.D.

(Tamil)—While the pratâpa-chakravartti érî-Pôsaia-vîra-Vallâla-Devaraéan was pleased to rule
the earth—

(From the date specified), we granted, with pouring of water, as a deva-dana for the god
Villîsvaram-udaiyâr of VillagâniundanpaUi, the village of S'attaidevanpalH in Erumarai-nâdu, the
tank Avanjikattu of the village and all the wet and dry lands adjoining the village, including the
wells underground and the trees overground within their four boundaries, in order to provide for
worship, sacred service and offerings of rice. This village shall continue as a sarva-mânya. (Usual
final imprecatory sentence).

Villa-gâmunda's son seems to have made a grant of the village, excluding the portion of the
cultivators, as a âêva-dâna, exempt from taxes, to......yândai..............
****
77

Date about 1310 A.D.

(Tamil)—For victory to the sword and arm of the pratâpa-chakravatti vîra-Vallâla-Dêvar—·

We, the inhabitants of Ku.. .. nâdu and Periya-nâdu remitted certain taxes (named) ....
****
78

Date 1495 A.D.

May it be prosperous. (On the date specified), Linga-râhuta 's son Lingana granted .. ngade-
pura of Jakasandra, two parts for the god Nâganàtha of Bêlûr and one part for the god Channa-
kèsava. Imprecations.
****
79

Date about 870 A.D.

Be it well. In the victorious year of the S'rîrâjya, under Satyavâkya-Permmatfi's Kali-yuga
Hanuman, Nâgattara,—the Irvvuliyûr odeya, Irugamayya's son Siriyamayya, fixed sluices to the two
tanks, had the eastern tank built, and obtained the bittuvatta of the three tanks. Imprecation.
****
80

Date 1515 A.D.

May it be prosperous. Be it well. (On the date specified), at the time of an eclipse of the
m00Dj—when Krishna-Eâya-mahârâya was ruling the kingdom of the world :—Sivannapa-Nayakaj
in order that dharma might be to his father, granted a field to provide for keeping up a cart for the
Agara tank.
****
8 81

Date 1363 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when (with usual titles) vira Bukkanna-Vodeyar's son
Kampauna-Vodeyar was in the city of Mujubâgil, ruling the kingdom of the world :—that
Bangalore Taluq

17

Kampanna-Vodeyar's son Kâmaiya-Nâyaka, in the presence of the farmers of this kingdom, granted
to Elahaka-nâd Allâla-jîya's son Tanniyappa, lands in Belartta of the Torevali-nâd of the south of
the .... nti-nâd, as a sarvamânya-kodage.
****
82

Date 1426 A.D.

Having the supreme profound syâd-vâda as a fruit-bearing token, may it prevail, the doctrine
of the lord of the three worlds, the Jina doctrine.

Be it well. (On the date specified), of the srî-Mûla-sangha, Dèsiya-gana, Kondakundânvaya
and Pustuka-gachha, Pra.....siddhânti-dêva's disciple Subhachandra-siddhânti-dêva's lay-disci-
ple Chakkimayya'8 (son) Nâgiya Kariyappa-dandanâyaka.............when ruling Morasti-nâd,

made a grant (effaced) for the Kaliyùr agrahàra, that the Chokkimayya Jinâlaya might continne as
long as sun and moon. Imprecations.
****
83

Date about 890 J.P.1

Be it well. When,—a spotless moon in the sky the Ganga-kuia praised in all the world, the
self-chosen lord of the Lakshmî of sovereignty over the earth decorated at her waist with a ζ me of
the wide circle of the waters of the ocean, his greatness adorned with the ornament of these and a
host of countless virtues,—srîmad Efeyapparasa, having made all his enemies powerless, was ruling
the Gangavâdi Ninety-six Thousand under the shadow of one umbrella .—on ordering Nâgattara
along with his feudatories and the army to Ayyapa-Dêva in order to fight against Bîra-Mahëndra,—
fighting in Tumbepàdi, when the battle was losing ground, going close up among the elephants, he
slew and died.

Hearing that, Ereyapa was pleased, and binding the JSTâgattara crown on Iruga, gave
him the Bempûr Twelve, secured by a sâsana, as a hilnâd. Those are as follows :—Kempûru,
Tovagûru, Pûvina-Pullimangala, Kûtanidu-Nallûru, Nallûru, Kotnarangundu, Iugalûru, D igmonel-
malli-Galanjavâgilu, Sâramu, Elkunde, Paravûru, Kûdal. Thus much, with the fields anp
boundaries, did Ereyapa give for the dutiful Nâga[tta]ra. Great good fortune,
****
85«

Date ? about 1300 A.D.

(Tamil)—(On the date specified), for the benefit of my father S'embândai-jiyar, I, VaUâla-jîyar,

made a grant for the god Tîrunâg?s^arani-udaiya.....-.to provide for offer, ngs of rice, sandal

and other requirements, and for a procession during the festival in the month of S'lttirai. (Usual
final imprecatory sentence). This grant is under the protection of Màhêsvaras.
****
85&

Date ahout 1262 A.D.

(Tamil)—I, Râjarâja-Karkata-maharâja S'okkanâyan, granted the wet and dry lands with
their four boundaries in the village of Orriyavanpalli for the god Tirunâgîivaram-udaiya Mahâdêvar.

ΑΠ the lower part of the stone is taken up with an elaborate piece of rude but intere>tins sculpture representing the battle
to which the inscription refers and the admission of the hero to paradise. See Mysore Inscriptions, frontispiece ; or better,
JSp- Ind. VI, 4ß. The stone is now in the Bangalore Museum.

18 Bangalore Taluq.
****
85c

Date ? about 1110 A.D.

(Tamil)—During the rule of Poysala-Dêva :—Tâmattândân, alias Murasu.....râjan, son

of Murasu-nâd-âlvâr, terrible to titled kings, who was tbe son of S'ôla-vêlâr—-one of the gâmundas
of Murasu-nâdu in Râjêndira-S'ôJta-vaJa-nâdu of Mudigonda-S'ôla-mandalam—granted certain
lands (specified) below the big tank of'Veppûr as a dêvadâna, caused a surrounding wall tobe
built at a cost of 500 pon, and gave certaiti Jands to Periyândàn, alias Nârpattennâyira-battan,
son of Era-battan, for conducting the duties of superintendent of the matha (mâdâpattiyam)
in this temple.................

(Usual final imprecatory sentence and final phrase).
****
86

Date ? about 1270 A.D.
Tamil)—(This inscription has no beginning).

.......pâkkam-udaiyan's son AÏ.agiyâr set up (the image of) a goddess to be taken out in

procession in the streets............ Vilakkavayiran gave a lamp-stand weighing eighteen

(?palams).
****
87

Date about 900 A.D.

Be it well. Nâgattara's house-manâger (mane-magadin) Pêgura went to svargga and the other
world.
****
88

Date about 900 A.D.
Nâgattara's daughter Tondabbe, ending her time in the manner appointed, died.
****
90

Date about 1400 A.D.

Be it well, For the god Nagarêsvara, Bêhûi- Challândi-Settr's son Gaudu-Sonnappa gave
vessels (namely)—a tray, a tripod, a bowl for the wave-offering of perfume and incense, and a
conch-shell.
****
91«

Date 1294 A.D.

Tamil)—In the 40th year of the reign oi the universal em peror ârî-Pôsala-vîra-Râmanâda-
Dêvar—

Ab thare had been no provision made formerly for offerings of rice for the god Kadikandiya.
suram-udaiya-nâyanâr —to provide for offerings of rice for the god, I, Kulôttunga-S'ôla-Tagadâdi-
râyar Mâra-S'ika-dêvar, granted (from the date specified), to continue for as long as the moon and
the sun exist, certain quantities (specified) of paddy from lands situated in different villages
(named). (Usual final imprecatory sentenced
****
9lb

Date ? about 1300 A.D.
(Tamil)—(This is only a fragment).

Some one seems to have given water cups, incense-burner, lamp, bell and conch-shell to some
temple. This charity is under the protection of Mâhêévnras.
Bangalore Taluq.

19
****
93

Date ? about 950 A.D.

......Parmmanandi-bhattâraka had this stone set up for Ravikânti-siddhânti, who was

Mankabbe-kanti.
****
94

Date about 900 A.D.

May prosperity be to the Jina sâsana. srîmat Nâgattara's daughter Tondabbe, performing
aanyasanam, expired.

****
95

Date ? about 950 A.D.

(The first part is nearly effaced).

.....Raya's son .... disciple of ....,—Kumâranandi-bhatâra, with his face towards

Kâmapura and Madambapattana of the Bide-kanda, according to custom wandering about........
****
96

Date! 1402 A.D.

Obeisance to Sâmba-S'iva. Copper sàsana of a gift. Obeisance to S'iva. Obeisance to
S'ambhu &c.

In order to understand the meanings of words do I adore the parents of the world, Pârvatî
and Paraniêsvara, united like a word and its meauing.

Be it well. (On the date specified), to Tryambaka Namassivâya, of the guru-kula, priest of
(with numerous praises) the god Nagarêsvara of Nimbâpuri in the Bhàskara-kshêtra, who appeared
to Kalikâla-Chôla,—the mahârâjadhirâja râja-paramêsvara râja-pratâpa, a lion among kings, master
of the northern southern eastern and western four oceans, champion ov\?r.. chieftains, a spear for
the head of Mâlava-Râya, a ganla-bhêrunda to hostile kings, the Vira-S'aiva Vîra-PratâpaOhôla-
Râya having made a representation to (with an immense number of epithets) certain Settis (named),
the heads of the caste,—they agreed to a grant of the following payments ;—For the worship,
festivals and all ceremonies of the god Nagarêsvara, all those of the gôtras of a thousand rishis,
settled that for those of their third caste, wherever they may be, they should pay 1 hana per house
per annum ; and for a marriage, 2 hana. Imprecations.

List of places to which this applies ; and directions for honourable treatment of the bearers of
this âàsana when they come to collect the dues.
****
97

Date 1347 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when the mahâ-mandalêâvara, subduer of hostile kings,
champion oyer kings who break their word, vira-Hariyappa-Vodeyar was ruling the kingdom of
the world :-—.. .. ... the ... Kali-nâd prabhu Gaudapa's son Honnapa granted. - .„ as a Jcodage, with

all the taxes (specified). Imprecations.
****
98

Date 1298 A.D.

Tamil—(On the date specified), I, Ir jaira^a-R arkata-mahâràjan, granted, with pouring of
water, as a madappuram, the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries, including the wells


Bangalore Taluq

underground and the trees overground, in the village of Vamayanpalli of Veppûr-pajru, to the emperor
of ascetics S'ivajnâna-pauditar S'embi-jîyar. He shall enjoy (these lands) for as long as the moon
and the sun endure, (Usual final imprecatory sentence.) He shall have this grant engraved on
copper and stone. The signatures of Vêttaiyir-chokkar, Nirukkanatti-udaiyâr and Elumbôdar.
****
99

Date 1262 A.D.

(Tamil)—(On the date specified), I, Râiarâja-Karkata-mahârâja S'okkanâyan, granted, for......

Tribuvanamalla-purâdirâyar, alias Tâmattâ......, the wet and dry lands with their four boundaries,

including tanks and ponds, in the village of Udayasamuttiram, to the mahâjanas-. .. including the
pûjâris Ilayavilli-âlvar, Bàlêndu-mauji.......and Gangaya-vibudhan.........
****
100

Date ] 294 A.D.

(Tamil)—In the 40th year of the reign of the universal emperor ârî-Poyéala-vîra-Irâmanâ-Dêvar—
(On the date specified), I, Irâjairàja-Karkata-mahàrâjari Tauiattâma .. , granted, as a
charitable gift, for feeding Brahmans, Anumasamuttiram and Unangimâran-kuttai, situated within
the boundaries of Veppûr, together with the adjoining wet and dry lands with their four boundaries,
including the wells underground and the trees overground, to the 28 men of this village who should
conduct the duties of tanapatis. (Then follow names of the 28 men).

I, Tâmattâmavar, made the above grant, with pouring of water, as a charitable gift, to
the 28 men, with the right to sell or give away (the lands), for the benefit of the king's sacred
body and of myself.

This charity shall last as long as the moon and the sun. (Usual final imprecatory sentence).

****
101
Date 1361 A.D.

Tamil)—(On the date specified), Vallappa-dennâyakkar, one of...... .. of the mahâ-manda-,

êsvara, the champion over kings who break their word, Ariyappa-udaiyar, and the inhabitants of
Veppûr nâdu—S'okkayappan and others (a few named)—seem to have made a grant.
****
102

Date? 1320 A.D.

(Tamil)—This inscription records a grant of lands, exempt from taxes, to Appar, son of
Ulagiyâlvar. (Usual final imprecatory sentence).
****
104

Date 1879 A.D.

(Telagu)—Obeisance to Râmânuja. Joined to the sacred feet (*. e. the disciple) of the estab-
lisher of the path of the vêdas, promoter of both vêdânta (the Sanskrit and the Drâvida), Tirukô-
vilûr YatirAjasvâmi,—Trisirapura Toreyûr Pôli-Setti's (son)—to Krishnappa-Nâyini's sons Nara-
simhalu-Nâyini and Perumâlu-Nâyini, the brother,—Subrâyalu-Nayadu, (on the date specified),
gained the holy place oi the sacred feet of the Achâryas (i. e. died).
Bangalore Taliiq. 21
****
105

Date ?1652 A.D.

May it be prosperous. (Ια the year specified), Channappanna-ayya's agent Yallapa-Nâyaka
remitted the marriage tax in the Sâraki-sîme, for all castes in the Bhandârûda village, and the
villages belonging to the Amrapura temple. Imprecation.
****
106

Date 1851 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), in the presence of Mari-Vrisbabhêndra-svâmi established
at the one-leafed Ulm tree of the Bande-matha, —adorned with all titles, Krishna-Râja-Vadeyar of
the Mysore State made a grant for the service of the mafka.


****
108

Date about ]060 A.D,

(Tamil)—(This inscription is incomplete and contains only a portion of the historical intro-
duction, which gives neither the name of the king nor the regnal year.)

Be it well. [In the year of the reign of Kô-pParakêsarivarmar, alias srî-Ràjêndra-Dêvar,
who,—] having made the two noble ladies—the goddess of fortune and the goddess of the earth—
his great queens ; raised.... his brilliant white umbrella ; destroyed the strong Kali ; and bestowed
beautiful crowns, set with jewels vying with one another in brilliancy, on his father's younger brother
Gangaikonda-Sôlan of overpowering strength, with the title the proud Irumadi-Sôlan ; among his
younger brothers of warlike strength, on the irate Mummadi-Sôlan, with the title Sôla-Pândiyan,
whose valour destroys enemies on the battle-üeld ; on Vîra-Sôlan, the lord of Kôli,1 who wore the
warrior's ankle-rings, with the title Karikâla-Sôlan, the lord of the ancient earth ; on Madurânta-
kan, whose strong and broad hand wielded the sword in warfare, with the title S'ôla-Gangan ; on
the good Parànta-dêvau, endowed with strength of shoulders, with the title S ola-(A)yyôddhyarâjan ·
among his sons, whom he affectionately cherished in his generous heart, on Irajêndra-S'ôlan
praised on this earth, with the title Uttama-S'ôlan ; on Mudigonda-S'ôlan, who wore a garland
made of a cluster of flowers and of fine opening buds, with the title S'ôla-Janakarâjan of great valour,
in whom the glory of the race of the Sun rests; on Irattapâdikonda-S'ôlan, who maintained the dignity
of pure Tamil, with the title S'ôla-Vallaban ; among the sons of his sons, on Madurântakan, who
wore sounding ankle-rings, brilliant as the sun, with the title S'undara-S'ôlan ; and on the peerless
Anaichchêvagan, whose hand held a strong bow, with the title Nirupêndra-S olan ;—was resplendent
on earth; and who—when the impetuous and angry S'alukki Ahavamalla,—having heard the
report that the Valavan (the Chôla king), desirous of war, had marched upon Iratta-mandalam of

superior strength, and had destroyed its fame.........and many districts and towns,—exclaimed

"This is a disgrace to me !", sprang up, his eyes burning with rage, went to the beautiful great
tîrtha Koppam, and commenced hostilities, though the shower of Ahavamalla's straight arrows pierced
his elephant's forehead and his own thighs and mound-like shoulders, and though the warriors
wearing ankle-rings, who had mounted the warlike elephant along with him, fell,—not minding
all this, directed (against the enemy) many matchless warlike weapons and sent to heaven
Jayaèingan, the younger brother of the valorous Chalukki, th3 warlike Pulakêsi, the fgarland-wear-
ing Dasapanman ; among proud princes, the maudalika (A)sôkan, Araiyan of great renown.....

Mottayan, who wore a garland of opening buds full of honey, the unfailing Nanni-Xulamban. and

Uraiyûr (warriore, neer Trichinopoly)

6
22

Bangalore Taluq.

other princes without number ; whereupon the terrified S'aiukki, having been utterly routed, along
with the steady Rêvan, Tuttan, armed with a spear, Gundamayyan, whose hand held a death-
dealing weapon, and many other furious princes, fled, with dishevelled hair, looking behind, with a
bent back,.......................................·
****
110

Date 1336 A.D.

Be it well. When, (with usual and other titles, including) a spear for the head of the Mâlava
king, a Bairava to the Gurjjara king's minister (vajtr), a Brahma-râkshasa to Hemmîra-Râya, the
form of ...to Adava-Râya, the establisher of the Chôla king, the setter up of the Pândya king, rooter
up of the Magara king, displacer of the Kâdava king,—Poysala vîra-Nârasinga-Dêva's son vîra-
Ballâla-Dêvarasa was in the residence of Dôrasamudra, ruling the kingdom of the earth in the enjoy,
ment of all manner of pleasures :—(on the date specified), when the mahâ-eâmantâdhipati, champion
over the world of men, Meyile-NâyakaChenneya-Nâyaka was ruling the Kukkala-nâd;—the Kukkala-
nâd maha-prabhu...Honna-Gauda's son and others (named) granted the ...... village as a sarbha-

mânya-hodege, with all rights and taxes (specified). Imprecations.

Written bv the sêuabhôva Jakkanna.
****
J 111

Date 1340 A.D.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when (with usual titles, including) consumer of the
forest Sêuna-Kâya's army, terrifier of Chôla, Gaula, and Gurjjara, a Rudra of the last deluge to

Ïelunga-Râia, a wild-fire in burning up----Kâdava-Râya, the Poysala pratâpa-chakravartti

Vishnuvarddhana vîra-Ballâla-Dêva was ruling the kingdom of the earth in peace and wisdom :—
when performing his anointing to the kingdom, in the year Vikrama, the king's sod,—the makâ-
sâmantâdhipati, champion over the world of men, Kôdiya-Nâyaka's son (with numerous epithets)
Mayileya-Nâyaka's younger brother Chenneya-Nâyaka, for the support of ... animals, cattle, birds,
and Sail other living beings, and the service at all times of (the goddess) Gangâ-dêvi, made the
Râmasamudra (tank) as a work of merit, expending 3000 honnu, in order that Mayileya-Nâyaka
Chenneya-Nàyaka may rule the earth in peace as long as the sun and moon endure ; and had
this stone sâsana of this work of merit inscribed. Benedictions and imprecations.

The nâdsênabhôva Kêsava-dêva's son Ananthanna's writing.

****
112

Date 1156 A.D.
(Tamil)—During the rule of srî-Nârasinga-Poysala-Dêvar.—

(On the date specified), Achchalaiyan, the perhadi of Kukkal-nâd-âlvâr's kingdom, on the

occasion of an attack on his town Tippur by Murasâdi...... and many gâmundas of the nâdu,

having defended his town and killed many, fell.

Mâchchi-dêvar........, caused this stone to be set up... ».........
****
114

Date about 1262 A.D.

Be it well. Dharma granted by Râjarâja Ka[ra]kada«mârâya Chokka-Nâya. The Talegatûr
Sivapura is granted to Muttina Kâmayya and all the other Mahêévaras. foras long as sun and
moon endure. Imprecation.
Bangalore Taluq. 23
****
114 and 1151

Date about 1262 A.D.

(Tamil)—I, Râjarâja-Kakkata-mâràyan S'okkanâyan, granted Talaigattûr S'ivapuram, together
with the wet and dry lands within its four boundaries, to Muttin Kâmayan and other Mâhêsvaras.
(Usual final imprecatory sentence). S'ôgudaiyan shall ? improve and enjoy certain lands (specified).
fThen follow names of the donees and details of the shares). I, Kâma-dêvar, will exact a fine
from and expel from his vritti any man who either leaves S'ivapuram for good, or slanders another,
or commits adultery. S'ûriya-dêva gets ten kulaga of wet land.
****
116

Date? 1578 A.D.

(In the year specified), the great champion over the three kings, Bammaya-Nâyaka made to
his guru Battàrayya a grant of the Tumvalarahalli village. Its boundaries. Imprecations.
****
117

Date 1339 A.D.

Be it well. When (with usual titles) the pratàpa-chakravartt Hoysana vira-Nârasimha-Dêva's
son vîra-Ballâla-Dêva was in Dôrasamudra, ruling the kingdom of the world;—(on the date specified)
when the mahâ-sàmantâdhipati, lord of the world of men, Kôteya-Nàyaka's son Mayileya-Nâyaka
Channeya-Nâyaka s son Kôteya-Nâyaka was ruling Kukkala-nàd;—the prabhu of that Kukkala-nâd
(rest effaced).

Date 1705 A.D.

May it be prosperous. Be it well. (On the date specified), when the râjâdhirâj a râja-paramêé-
vara praudha-pratâpa apratima-narapati, born in the Atreya-gôtra, Mahiéûr-nag ara Dêva-Râja.
Vaderaiya's son, Kanthîrava-Narasa-Râja-Vaderayya, seated on the throne of S rîrangapattana,
was ruling the empire of the world :—for the offerings and illuminations of the god Yenkatèsvara
which his father had caused to be newly set up in the fort of Bengalûr belonging to his government,
he made a grant of Kottanûr in Gottegere belonging to the fort of Bengalûr, together with its hamlets
Kôlâtapura, Tidadahalh and' Bilapp;mahalli, altogether 4 villages, with all rights. Imprec
ations. ^

Date 134ΰ A.D.

(In the year specified), Jinjanna-Nâyaka's son Jakkanna-Nâyaka, in the time of Ballâla-Râya,
gave Kâttu-Nâyaka's Jaddapura to Pâtàlabliôji-vodeyar's son Siddayâii-vodeyar, within the four
boundaries belonging to Xâtta-Mallikânunarâyapura. Imprecations.
The engraver of the sâsana was Avarigere Nalôja's son Basava-vôja.
****
122
Date 1408 A.D.

Beit well. (On the date specified), when the mahârâjâdhirâja râja-paramêsvara vîra-Déva-
Râya-mahârâya was ruling the kingdom of the world :—the adhikâri Hay akasa made for the god

^his Tamil version partly precedes und partly follows the Kannada version No. 114


BaDgalore Taluq

Tirumalenâtha of Kanneiii in Kukkala-nâd a grant of two looms, free of tax.
Usual final verses.
****
123

Date 1495 A.D.

May it be prosperous. Be it well. (On the date specified), when the ma hâ-mandalêâvara,
champion over the mustaches of the world, Kathâri-Sàlva, Sâluva Immadi-Narasinga-Râya-mahà-
râya was ruling the kingdom of the world :—the mahà-mandalêsvara Gôde-Râya (with various
epithets) made, to the sons of Timmarasa, the temple priest of Vakkejallimangala and others
(named), at the time of an eclipse of the sun, a grant of the Gangadihalli village in Kukkala-nâd
belonging to his Nâyakship, giving it another name Timmannarâjapura, as an agrahâra,—in order
that merit might be to Immadi-Narasinga-Ràya-mahârâya,-—with all rights.
****
126

Date about 1650 A.D.

The Elavakka-nâd prabhu .... ? Chennaya-Gauda granted to [Yesavanta]pura Kempa-
Gauda as a Twdage ..
****
127

Date 1431 A.D.
Obeisance to Ganâdhïpati. Obeisance to S'ambhu &c.

Be it well. (On the date specified), when the m ihârîya râja-paramêâvara vîra-Vijaya-
bhûpati-Râya-mahàrâya's son Dêva-Râya mahâriya, on the throne of Vijayanagara, was ruling
the kingdom of the world in peace and wisdom by the personal order of that Dêva-Râya-mahâ-
râya,—for the offerings and decorations of (the gol) Sôme-dêva in front of the town in Sakana-
samudra,—the great minister Mangappa-dannâyaka s son Pratâpa-Râya granted a dharma-sâsana
as follows for the offerings and decorations of the god Some have we granted the Virûpâkshapura
village, whose rental is 20 honnu,—a hamlet of Dêvasamudra in the Yelahanka-nâd, belonging to
and under S'ivanasamudra granted for our office of Nâyaka,—making it Vijajaclêvarâyapura, and
with that Devarây apura, land (specified) under the old tank of Dêvasamudra,—at the time of the
eclipse of the sun,—in order that long life, health and increase of wealth may be to Dêva-Râya-
mahârâya, and from love to Paramêsvara. Details of the rental, of the ceremonies to be performed,
and of the seven persons to be employed to minister to the god. Usual final verses.

Written by Pratâpa-Râya.
****
129

Date 1342 A.D.

Beit well. (On the date specified), wh >n th η pratâpa-chakravartti Hoysala vîra-Ballâla-
Dêvarasa was in the city of Unnâmale, ruling the kingdom in peace and wisdom :—the nobleman
(ekhatiga) of his house, the mahâ-sâmantàdhipati, ( hampion over mustaches, Chikka-Bayireya-
Nâyaka and a number of others (named), with all the farmers, made to Nâgavâra Mâragonda's
Mârapa a grant of Nâgisettiyahalli with half the lands under the old tank of that village, as a
lodage, for as long as the sun and moon endure.
****
132

Date 1376 Α.ΏΛ

(Tamil)--While the mahâ-mandalêsvara, desLrov r of hostile kings, champ'On over kings who
bnak their word, lord of the eastern southern western and northern oceans, Suratrâna (Sultan) of
Saka 1290 is given as corresponding; to the cyclic year Nala. But Nala ~S'aka 1299.

Bangalore Taluq 25

the Hindu Ràjas, the maharaja paramétra sn-nra-Bakkanna-idaiyar wa? pleased to rule the
earth—

(On the date specified), I—the oiahà-sâtnantâdhipati, champioa over the three kings, champion
over kings who break their word, Mayalaya-Nàyakar's sou Dêvaya-Nàyakkan -granted, with pouring
of water, to continue as a sarva-mmya for as loag as the moon and the sun endure, cartain lands

(specified) in Dêvasamudra, alias.....palli, of Ilaippâkka-nâdu, to a number of Brâhmans of

various gôtras. (Usual final imprecatory sentence and final Sanskrit verse).
****
133

Date 1307 A.D,

(Tamil)—(From the year specified), f>r victory to the sword and arm of the pratâpa-chakravatti
srî-Pôsala-vîra-Vallàla-Dêvar, and for the baneâfc of Vallappa-dennàkkar, we—the mahà-praeâyitta
Ninrân, the superintendent of the ? wesfcera portion of Mâsandi-nâdu, S'embi-dêvar, Villa-gâmundar
and other (three named) inhabitants of the nîdu, and Kôvâudai—having cleared the jungle in the
tract of land adjoining Peru-Erumûr, ? levelled the ground, built a village, constructed a tank by
? removing the sand, and namodthe village Vachchidevarpuram, granted to Vachchi-dêvar the village
and the wet and dry lands adjoining it, with their four boundaries, as a madappuram, exempt
from taxes, for as long as the moon and the sun exist. (Usual final imprecatory sentence).

The signature of Ninrân. The signature of the accountant of the nâdu, Periyapiljai.
****
134

Date 1308 A.B.

Be it well. When the pratâpa-chakravartti Hoysala vîra-Ballâia-Oêvarasa was ruling a
peaceful kingdom : —and the great [minister] Dêvanna's [son] Mudeya Allapa-dandanâyaka was
ruling Elahaka-nâd the sarvvâdhikâri Uriyanna, with all the chief farmers, made a grant of
land (effaced) at Hebâla to ...... (in the year specified). Imprecations.
****
136

Date ? 1689 Α.ΏΛ

(In the year specified), we, Marige-Gauda, will give to any one for this (idakJce) 10 hana, 5
hana, 6 hana. At this rate the nâd-sâtmbôva ... kola Nachap pa will ... the Gauda's paddâna.
Imprecation.
****
137

Date ? 1676 A.D.

(In the year specified), Rûpa-Dêva-Râni's son Balleya-Râya-Râni granted to Samudradakôte
Dâsa's son Nammâluvâr, as a dâsôha, knd (spacified) under the old tank of Hebbala belonging to
our office of Nâyaka, and in other places (specified). Imprecation.
****
138

Date 1538 A.D.

(On the date specified), when Achynta-Ràya-mahârâya was on a secure throne :—Mecharasaya
made a grant in Anupe.... in the Sivanasamudra-sîme. Imprecation.

1 The purport of this inscription is unintelligible.
26

Bangalore Taluq
****
139

Bate 1386 A.B.

(On tie date specified), when the mahâ-mandalêsvara, subduer of hostile kings, champion over
kings who break their word, vîra-Hariyappa-Vodeyar Bukkanna-Vodeyar was ruling a secure
kingdom :—the mahâ-sâmantâdhipati, champion over the world of men, Mayileya-Nâyaka's son
Kôteya-Kâyaka made to Bankôdi Déva-Perumàl's son Kharyya-dêva a grant of Jûbanahalli in the
Yalahaka-nâd, as a sarvamanya-Ttodage.
****
139a

Bate ? 1237 A.B.1

(Tamil)—During the rule of the emperor of the whole world Poysala-vîra-Nârasinga-Dêvar—in
the time of Mannimanavâdai-udai-gandan S'ikka-dêvar of Ilaippàkka nâdu,—I, Periya-Trelôka-
éettiyân, built (in the year specified) the tower of the temple of the god S'ivanîsvaram-udaiyâr, and
granted some land, exempt from taxes, to S ôla-bhatta's son Kanka-battan. I, Vairi-battan, had the
work of the vimâna done............................
****
139δ

Date ? 1273 A B.

(Tïiis inscription is fragmentary)

(Tamil)—(In the year specified), some pradâmn (minister) seems to have made a grant,
with pouring of water, to provide for offerings of rice for some god of.. .. Ràma-chchaturvêdi-
mangalam.
****
139c

Bate ? 1286 A.B.

C This is also fragmentary)

(Tamil)—It seems to record a grant of lands by the mahâjanas of some place to provide for
oil for lamps etc. for some god.
****
140

Date ? about 700 A.Bß

(Έ1βρ7ιαηί on the seal)

Be it Twell. From the victorious residence of Kalinga-nagara, which was like Amarapura
(the city of the gods), devoted to worship of the lotus feet of the divine Gôkarna-svâmi,—who is
set up on the pure peak of the Mahêndra mountain, master (guru) of things movable and
immovable, the sole architect (sûtradhâra) for the creation of all the world, bearing the moon
as his crest,—having raised the shout of victory in the struggles of many battles, his two feet
illuminated with the rays from the groups of jewels in the crests of the circle of all the
feudatories prostrated by his valour, the mahârâjâdhirâja paramêsvara srî-Râjêndravarma's son srL
Dêvêndravarma-Dêva, being in good health, (thus) commands the householders residing in the

Sidhatâ village and its neighbourhood in Yarâhavartani :—Be it known to you that this village,_

for the worship, incense and offerings of Parâmesvara-parama-bhattâraka,—to Râtuka, a resident
ι

The Kali year 4343 is given as corresponding to Hêvilambi. But Kali 4343=Plava ; and Hêvilambi =Kali 4339.
Perhaps 1237 A. D. is meant ; but this year does not fall within the reign of Nârasimha II (1220-1235).

3

The inscription contains many mistakes.

Bangalore Taluq

27

of Pàlukôsu, of the Kateya-sûtra, performer of the five vows,—-in order (that merit, long life and
glory may be to our mother, father and ourselves,—at the time of the sankrâvti. with pouring of
water, has been given, its boundaries are here written (details of boundaries).

By Navanîtarâsi-guru, dwelling in S'riparvata, was this established for the srôtriya.

As to this are the verses delivered by Vyâsa ;—By many kings has the earth been enjoyed,
Sagara and others ; whosesoever is at the time the land, his is then the fruit. Whoso takes away
land given by himself or by another is born a worm in ordure and with his fathers cooked.

Written by Utnina Srîkhandi.
****
141

Date? m A.D.

Be it well. Success through the adorable Padmanâbha. resembling (in colour) the cloudless sky.

A sun illumining the clear firmament of the Jahnavi (or Ganga)-kula, possessed of a kingdom
sprung from the swift victory of his arm, adorned with the ornament of a wound received in cutting
down in battle the hosts of his cruel enemies, of the Kânvâyana-sa-gôtra, was srîmat Konganivarmma-
dharmma-mahàdhirjah.

Mis son, inheriting the qualities of his father, possessing a character for learning and modesty,
having obtained the honours of the kingdom only for the sake of the good government of his
subjects, a touchstone for (tasting) gold the learned and poets, skilled among those who expound
and practise the science of ρDlitics in all its branches, having well distributed faithful servants,
author of a treatise on the law of adoption (äattaha, sûtraj, was srimat Mâdhava-mahâdhirâjah.

His son, uuiting the qualities of his father and grandfather, having entered into war with
many elephants (so that) his fame had tasted the waters of the four oceans, of wonderful skill
acquired from riding rutting elephants and horses, distinguished for wealth gained through the four
modes of attack, was srîmad Harivarmma-mahâdhirâjah,

His son, devoted to the worship of gurus, cows and Brâhmans, meditating on the feet of
Nârâyana, was srîmad Vishnugôpa-mahâdhirâjah.

His head purified by the pollen from the lotuses the feet of Tryambaka, his two arms grown
stout and hard with athletic exercises, having by personal strength and valour purchased the king-
dom, reviver of many thousand donations and sacrifices for long-ceased festivals of the gods and
Brahman endowments, performer of the offering of first-fruits (âgrayana), remover of the fear of
others, his two arm? shining with ge ns of hard knobs produced by drawing his bow, his
race glorified by his great and wide-spresd fame as the waterlilies by the rays o? the moon, was
êrîmat Mâdhava-mahàdhirâjah.

The beloved sister's son of 'sn-Kri3hnavarmma-mahadhiraja,~-who, anointed with the final
ablutions of the completed Inrse-'sacniicî, w is the sun to the firmament of the auspicious Kadamba-
kula,—having obtained the anointing to the kingdom on the couch of the lap of his divine mother,
enjoying to the full the essence of the three objects of desire without one interfering with the other,
his mind illumined with the increase of learning and modesty, of a wide-spread fame gained by
victory in many wars which made the three worlds appear as one milk ocean, a lake to the lotus
of compassion for the bees the eyes of fur women disturbed by the shower of the arrows of the
god of love, reckoned the chief among poets, the ablest among the most able, was srimat Kongani-
mahâdhirâjah.

By his son, successor to the qualities of his father, his broad chest embraced by the arms
of one who desired him though assigned by her father to the son of another, surrounded by

28

Bangalore Taluq

feudatories subjected by the exercise of the three powers of increase, surrounded by ministers
attached to him by constant affection and gifts, having with the sharp sword in his hand cut
down and with his arms uprooted the hosts of his enemies, of a form glorious with virtue and
set with the gams of the daily improving qualities of the best of men, though not matured in
age yet possessed of ripe virtue, amine of the clustres of many distinguished qualities, in
punishing according to desert the equal of Vaivasvata, having sufficient agents for protecting the
castes and religious orders in the South, having good subjects, of supreme righteousness, meditating

on the feet of the divine Kamalôdara (Vishnu),—what more?—by the Yuddhishtira of the Kali age
by srîmad Κ ongani-mahârâj a—«in the third year of the great wealth increased by himself, in the
month S'râvana, on new moon day,—-to the maintainer of the sacred fire, dwelling in Mahâsênapura,

Vâsasarmmâ .... {rest illegible).

5th plate missing.

****
142

Date? 1105 Α.ΌΛ

(Nâgarî characters).

Obeisance to S'ambhu, adorned with the points of the rays of the moon, the.. ,. tree of plenty

Be it well. When, the refuge of all the world, favourite of earth and fortune, the maharaja-
dhiràja paramêsvara parama-bhattaraka, boon lord of Kalyâna-pura, bestower of widowhood on
the wives of the hostile elephant-riding Bhagadatta kings, a sun to the lotus the Châlukya-kula
fierce in war, a bow to Kalinga, a sun among champions, self-sustained hero, bold in the field of
battle, displacer of Aâvapati-Ràya, destroyer of Gajapati-Râya, smiter on the head of Narapati-Râya
tanner of the deer the feudatories, the daily terror of the four quarters of Konkaua, a son to the
wives of others, having a flag with the crest of a golden boar, adorned with the glory of all lines of
kings, born in the Sôma-vamsa (or Lunar race), srî-Vîra-Nonamba-chakravartti was in Kalyàna -
pura, ruling the kingdom in peace and wisdom :—on making a victorious expedition to the South
from the Henjara village, Jcatakam utulitam, in the S'aka year 366, the year Târana, in the dark
fortnight of the month Phâlguna, on Thursday, at the time of new moon,—

The principal Gangavâdikâra, the vadda-byavahâri of the Châlukyas, Mâro-Satti, of theHalahâdi
village, in the Kunda-nâd Seventy district of the Gangavâdi Ninety-six Thousand, having in the
Henjara battle pierced the horse and brought down the honour of Kilva-Râya,-^there were given
(to him) the five-fold gifts,—umbrella, palanqnin, escort, throne, and land with fines and excise-
given with the eight rights of fall possession, and with all ceremony. (Details of the land, and
boundarie s Witnesses.

Written by the highly accomplished Odvâchari.

Whoso seizes upon a span-breadth of land, or so much as a finger's breadth, shall linger in hell
till the deluge,

*Vl?Am°™û,~Ari-râya-mastaùa-tala-praMri (smiter on the heads of hostile kings).

The professed date is 445 or 45Ö A.D. S'aka 366 expired = Pramâthi.-Târana = S'aka 372.
